Game,dialogue
Super Mario RPG: Legend of the Seven Stars


                        "Birdo": [
                                "Ha ha ha ha. I'm so ... lonely. Will you play with me?",
                                "Oh ... If you had played with me, I was going to give you the key to",
                                "this room.",
                                "Thanks!"
                        ],
                        "Jinx": ["You did well for your inexperience, Jagger."],
                        "Geno": [
                                "Stop! Hold it right there! You don't know what you're doing. RETURN that star to me!",
                                "I serve ... a higher authority ... That Star Piece belongs to everyone. You can't keep it.",
                                "Hey! Chill out!",
                                "Stop it! That's enough.",
                                "Thanks for the help! But ... who are you?",
                                "So! You're THE Mario! WE know about you!",
                                "Thanks for the help. You really got me out of a jam. Why are you staring at me?",
                                "Higher than that, I'm afraid! Do you two know anything about the \"Star Road\"?",
                                "Completely in the dark, eh? Well, it's a big mess up there right now",
                                "That's \"STAR ROAD\", my fluffy little friend"


Stardew Valley


        "aliases": {
                "Haley": {






Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic


"Beast": {
                        "Commander Dern": ["Run, run!"]
                },
                "Black Vulkar": {
                        "Calo Nord": ["Go away.", "Smart.", "One.", "Two.", "Three."]
                },
                "Music Room Patron": {
                        "Female Music Room Patron": [
                                "Did you hear what happened after the big swoop race?",
                                "Hmph - who dresses you? You look like you crawled up here from the Lower City.",
                                "Isn't this band great? They can't leave Taris because of the Sith quarantine,",
                                "Hmph! I don't know what the guys in here find so attractive about those Twi'leks.",
                                "Did you hear? Bendak got dusted in that death match - by a woman, no less!",
                                "Did you hear the news? Bendak got dusted in that death match!",
                                "Have you heard? Someone's going to fight Bendak Starkiller in an illegal death match!",
                                "Everyone's worried the Sith will come in here and shut this place down."
                        ],
                        "Male Music Room Patron": [
                                "They say a brawl broke out at the swoop races this year.",
                                "Nice outfit. You steal those clothes from a bum in the Lower City?",
                                "The band is pretty good, but I'm getting a little sick of them.",
                                "Check out those Twi'lek dancers.",
                                "Did you hear? The great Bendak Starkiller is dead.",
                                "So I heard Bendak Starkiller finally lost a death match.",
                                "Have you heard? Somebody's going to fight Bendak Starkiller in an illegal death match!",
                                "Well, people complain, but things under the Sith really aren't so bad."
                        ]
                },
                "Jedi": {
                        "Female Jedi": [
                                "The kath hounds seem to have calmed down. The settlers must be relieved.",
                                "The kath hounds have been very active of late. The settlers feel they are becoming more dangerous.",
                                "I hear that the Sith have defeated another Republic battlefleet. I do not know how much longer the Republic can last.",
                                "Please, don't disturb me; I have pressing matters at hand.",
                                "Dantooine has a splendid environment. I would hate to see it damaged by too many settlers.",
                                "It is relaxing to come outside and enjoy the fresh air once in a while. It relieves stress."
                        ],
                        "Male Jedi": [
                                "I heard that the Sith have destroyed Taris. This bodes ill for us...",
                                "Please, do not disturb me, I have pressing matters at hand.",
                                "Enjoy the time you have here on Dantooine. I think the Council might decide to move to a different world soon.",
                                "I hear that the Sith torture Jedi prisoners until they give in to the dark side. I hope that never happens to me!",
                                "Dantooine is one of our last refuges. The Sith hunt us everywhere."
                        ]
                },
                "Jedi Knight": {
                        "Leading Jedi Knight": [
                                "You made it! Several Jedi have already gone ahead into the Star Forge. We have to strike while we still have the element of surprise!",
                                "If we don't stop Bastila from using her Battle Meditation the entire Republic fleet will be wiped out!",
                                "Come on, before they...",
                                "Damn! So much for catching them unprepared.",
                                "We'll deal with these Sith - you get into the Star Forge and find Bastila! Hurry!",
                                "We'll deal with these Sith - you get into the Star Forge and find Malak!",
                                "We have to find Malak! A victory by the Republic fleet won't mean anything if the Dark Lord gets away.",
                                "We don't want the Sith to cut off our escape route. We'll stay here and hold this docking bay. You get in there and find Bastila!",
                                "We don't want the Sith to cut off our escape route. We'll stay here and hold this docking bay. You get in there and find Malak!"
                        ],
                        "Twi'lek male Jedi Knight": [
                                "The Sith will want to cut off our escape. We'll stay here and protect the ships so we can get out of here once you stop Bastila!",
                                "The Sith will want to cut off our escape. We'll stay here and protect the ships so we can get out of here once Malak's dead!"
                        ]
                },
                "K-X12a Battle Droid": {
                        "Marlena Venn": [
                                "Having fun on the dunes, Tanis? I made sure you would. Here's the deal: Your precious droids have trapped you. They'll hold you until you die of thirst. Make a mistake while repairing them, they explode. Have a good death. My mother was right about you."
                        ]
                },
                "K-X12b Battle Droid": {
                        "Marlena Venn": [
                                "Having fun on the dunes, Tanis? I made sure you would. Here's the deal: Your precious droids have trapped you. They'll hold you until you die of thirst. Make a mistake while repairing them, they explode. Have a good death. My mother was right about you."
                        ]
                },
                "K-X12c Battle Droid": {
                        "Marlena Venn": [
                                "Having fun on the dunes, Tanis? I made sure you would. Here's the deal: Your precious droids have trapped you. They'll hold you until you die of thirst. Make a mistake while repairing them, they explode. Have a good death. My mother was right about you."
                        ]
                },
                "K-X12d Battle Droid": {
                        "Marlena Venn": [
                                "Having fun on the dunes, Tanis? I made sure you would. Here's the deal: Your precious droids have trapped you. They'll hold you until you die of thirst. Make a mistake while repairing them, they explode. Have a good death. My mother was right about you."
                        ]
                },
                "Man": {
                        "Upper City Man 1": [
                                "I'm not looking for any trouble with you Sith. Please, just leave me alone.",
                                "People complain about the Sith, but this quarantine is good for all the businesses on Taris. Look at Javyar's cantina. That place has never been busier!",
                                "If the Sith wanted to get on everyone's good side, they'd go clean up the swoop gangs in the Lower City.",
                                "What's this, another off-worlder? I didn't realize how many of you there were on Taris until this Sith quarantine.",
                                "I heard a bunch of wreckage from the battle overhead crashed into the Undercity. Think of the damage it could have caused if it had landed here!"
                        ]
                },
                "Mechanic": {
                        "Dreshdae Mechanic": [
                                "Still around the starport, I see. Heading off, soon?",
                                "Oh, nobody special. I just do the routine maintenance work for the ships that come in.",
                                "Oh, I've seen this little ship before plenty of times.",
                                "You don't need to worry about me saying anything. I don't give a whit what you do with your ship. Smuggling's what the Hawk was made for, though.",
                                "You sure can.",
                                "Not much. It's a pretty barren planet, to tell the truth.",
                                "Probably all them ruins they found on the surface. That's the reason they built their academy here, I guess, to dig all them ruins up.",
                                "There's people that come here from all over Sith space to try and join the academy.",
                                "You don't. Not unless you're a Sith in the academy.",
                                "I don't know. There's all kinds of hopefuls in the colony trying to get in... why don't you ask one of them?",
                                "A Star Map? You mean like a navigation chart?",
                                "If them Sith found a Star Map in those ruins, nobody's ever mentioned it.",
                                "Yep. Take care, now.",
                                "There's a whole bunch of old Sith ruins up on the surface of the planet.",
                                "Nice to see the Hawk's still in one piece. Beauty of a ship, that."
                        ]
                },
                "Mercenary": {
                        "Echani Mercenary 2": [
                                "Your offer is pretty good. But I've heard some nasty things about you Sith. Is it true you bombed Taris into dust?",
                                "You make a good point. And I've never turned down a job that pays up front.",
                                "Sorry, but you're too late to recruit me. I've just hired on with the Sith",
                                "Then why are you bothering me? I'm here on Manaan to find work as a mercenary.",
                                "Hey, keep your lectures. The Sith pay well, and they pay up front.",
                                "I don't have time to sit here and answer your questions."
                        ],
                        "Mercenary (Submersible)": [
                                "How... how did you get in? Did they send another submersible? Quick, we have to get out of here, we have to get away!",
                                "No! No! We have no time, we have to leave now!",
                                "We have to! We have to leave! The Selkath, they went crazy!",
                                "I was one of the mercs the Republic sent down here to find out what happened.",
                                "And the Selkath came out... screaming and croaking their fishy little war-cries.",
                                "They swarmed out and over us. There was no way we could stop them.",
                                "So we ran... But hardly any of us made it.",
                                "The sharks... the firaxa out there and... worse... ",
                                "No! I locked the door so that the Selkath won't get in. If you open it, we're all done for!",
                                "If you go in there, you're dead! You're all dead!",
                                "If you want to die, then go! You won't hear me mourning for you!",
                                "Back to the surface. Yes... NO!! There's something out there... it got the other submersible already.",
                                "We can't leave until you do something.",
                                "But all the machinery and stuff is in the southern half, and that's been flooded!",
                                "Hey! Y-you... you can't just rip me to pieces! I'll die!!",
                                "That doesn't mean its not still out there! Watching.. waiting...",
                                "What!? No! You're one of them! You'll never get me!",
                                "They're dead! All dead! They swarmed out and over us.",
                                "I don't know what you're talking about. I've never seen any map, just stinking, reeking death.",
                                "The Selkath, they went crazy! They started killing anything that moved.",
                                "Where did you go? How did you get back here without being eaten?",
                                "You just got lucky! Or... or it's waiting for me to go back before eating me!",
                                "When the Republic sends a real team down, they'll save me!",
                                "If you're going to go into the rest of the station, don't expect me to help you.",
                                "No!!! Whatever's out there will eat me too! Eat all of us!",
                                "You can't make me! I won't go!",
                                "Nonono! It will eat us all up if we go out there! At least I'm safe here behind this door. The Selkath can't get me in here.",
                                "I don't know... I don't know why! But I'm not going to take my chances out there... It's waiting for me, I know it!",
                                "If you're going to go in there, do it quickly!"
                        ]
                },
                "Echani Mercenary": {
                        "Echani Mercenary 1": [
                                "That's an awful lot of money... is there something you're not telling me?",
                                "Makes sense, I guess. Alright, I'm in. When do I start?"
                        ],
                        "Echani Mercenary 2": [
                                "You hiring for the Republic or the Sith?",
                                "Then why are you wasting my time? There's big money to be made here - I can't risk missing a job offer 'cause I'm yapping with you!"
                        ]
                },
                "Sith Patron": {
                        "Female Sith Patron": [
                                "I'm not here to chat. I just finished a long shift at the military base and now I'm just looking to relax.",
                                "Let me enjoy my drink in peace, and I won't have to run you in for questioning.",
                                "If you're here to complain about the quarantine don't waste your breath."
                        ],
                        "Male Sith Patron": [
                                "This Tarisian ale is fantastic! We should have conquered this planet ages ago!",
                                "This cantina isn't the fanciest joint I've ever been in, but it's a good place to unwind after a hard shift at the military base.",
                                "Taris isn't such a bad place. I've been stationed in worse places than this during my commission."
                        ]
                },
                "Outcast Man": {
                        "Outcast Man 1": [
                                "I once lived above, with the rich and privileged. But I was cast down here - a punishment far worse than my crimes deserved!",
                                "The rakghoul disease can infect you. It can transform you into one of those monsters! I've seen it happen!",
                                "You are the one who brought us the rakghoul cure! The entrie village thanks you. I just regret we have nothing to give you as a reward.",
                                "A lifetime lived in this dark place can drive you mad! Just look at poor old Rukil if you don't believe me - he's lost his mind!"
                        ],
                        "Outcast Man 2": [
                                "A few of the braver villagers dared to leave the safety of the fence. They... they never returned",
                                "Thank you! My wife was one of those banished because she had the rakghoul disease. If you hadn't cured her, I would have never seen her again!",
                                "The rakghouls took my wife! I can only pray she is dead... I cannot bear to even think of the alternative.",
                                "They say anyone bitten by a rakghoul will become a rakghoul themselves. It can't be true, can it? It's too horrible!"
                        ]
                },
                "Outcast Woman": {
                        "Outcast Woman 1": [
                                "I had fine clothes, a beautiful bed - now I wear rags and I sleep on the ground like an animal! Were my crimes so horrible that I should now suffer like this?",
                                "We have no food, no weapons - nothing! How can we live like this? We are doomed."
                        ],
                        "Outcast Woman 2": [
                                "The rakghouls are increasing in number. We cannot even venture beyond the gates for food without being attacked!",
                                "Thank you... my husband was one of those banished because he had the rakghoul disease. If you hadn't cured him, I would have never seen him again!",
                                "The rakghouls will devour us all, unless we starve to death first."
                        ]
                },
                "Pilot": {
                        "Elder Pilot": [
                                "Greetings, friend. Fellow pilot, are you? Wouldn't mind taking a spin in the Ebon Hawk, myself. Sleek ship, that one.",
                                "Nice to see you again. Hold onto that Hawk... it'll do well by you.",
                                "In a small colony like this, everyone knows everyone's business.",
                                "Wouldn't make any difference to me. Just wish I had a ship like that, myself. Business is steady here with the Sith, but it's a boring haul.",
                                "Ah, who cares about them? I've seen some of those things they're digging up in those ruins in the valley. Pretty creepy, if you ask me.",
                                "Don't be stupid. I was talking to one of those Sith and he said there are tombs there dating back to when the Sith were here in ancient times.",
                                "So says you. He said that the planet was settled by the Sith a long time ago, and then they all left or something. Those tombs are really important to them.",
                                "We used to haul everything to Taris, and the Sith would take it off our hands there. Not sure where we'll be bringing it now.",
                                "It's in a valley on the surface, beyond some mountains to the east. No land route... that's why they have us fly in.",
                                "Well, regardless, the Sith don't let anybody near that valley. Even when we land, they watch us like a Drayberian hawk and want us gone quickly.",
                                "Hah! Now that'd be a sight to see.",
                                "Sure thing. Good flying, friend.",
                                "No. We're not due for another shipment for at least another week.",
                                "Oh, just a boring freighter. We've had some pretty steady work here, though, since the Sith started their excavations up on the surface.",
                                "Sorry. Hard not to be interested. All we get to do is freighter work, though the Sith certainly provide a lot of that.",
                                "I never said it wasn't. Just would be nice to fly something with a bit of thrust, for once."
                        ],
                        "Younger Pilot": [
                                "It's better than thinking too much about all the Sith lurking about, here.",
                                "The Hawk's been in and out of here for ages. An out-of-the-way starport is a good place for, uh... privateers. Not saying you are one.",
                                "In case you're forgetting, partner, they don't exactly want us talking about their business.",
                                "Weird artifacts. Looks like alien stuff. Maybe aliens lived on Korriban a long time ago, who knows?",
                                "There were Sith here in ancient times? Sounds like he was feeding you a line. Korriban's only been settled for a short time.",
                                "Tombs, hey? That makes the stuff they send us even creepier. Wish I didn't have to haul it around.",
                                "Shows what you know. The academy has a route through the mountain... that's how all their students get to the excavation site.",
                                "Not a chance. You'd be better off sneaking through the academy, if you wanted to go to the valley.",
                                "Our ship will be ready soon. Then it's off to Coruscant for a week or so.",
                                "You own the Ebon Hawk, don't you? Wish I could fly a bird like that."
                        ]
                },
                "Prospective Sith Student": {
                        "Prospective Sith Student (middle)": [
                                "I... I must g-get into... the academy... must...",
                                "You... you have a medallion! How... how did you... unghhhh...",
                                "Leave... leave me be! I won't listen to your... manipulations.",
                                "Just... just a few hours longer... just a few hours, surely...",
                                "You'll get your... turn soon enough, fool."
                        ],
                        "Prospective Sith Student (right)": [
                                "You... talked to Mekel? Have I proved my worth? Did he say anything...?",
                                "Oh... oh. All this... for nothing...",
                                "N-no! That can't be... you're wrong! I... can't have wasted my life...",
                                "Go... home...? I...",
                                "I... don't believe you! You just want to... be chosen!",
                                "No, p-please... I... I cannot...",
                                "P-please... don't hurt me... I am too weak with hunger..."
                        ],
                        "Prospective Sith Student (aqualish)": [
                                "Just leave me alone. I have to get in the academy!",
                                "You... you were talking to Mekel! I saw you! Where did he go? D-did he... did he tell you I was worthy?!",
                                "What?! I... I've wasted all this time! How could I have been so... foolish! I could have died!",
                                "I'll find another way in, I swear it! I'll show him! Thank you!",
                                "You're wrong! I... must wait here to be worthy;",
                                "Go now, and t-tempt me no more! I... will be strong!",
                                "N-no! Not after all this time! I... oh, this is terrible!",
                                "Mother will be so angry! Ooohh...",
                                "Hah! L-like... like I would believe that!",
                                "He... he did? The guard at the door? My final test? At last!",
                                "I... I'll do it! I'll prove my strength! AAAAAAHHHH!!",
                                "You... must think I am a great f-fool! Go away! I will get in, I will!",
                                "I... suppose he'll come back. Well, then, I'll just have to wait!",
                                "I have to stand at attention. P-please... don't distract me, whoever you are.",
                                "I... I'm trying to prove my worth to enter the Sith academy, here.",
                                "We've been here... for so many days. I'm so hungry!",
                                "Mekel. H-he's the Sith... the one watching us from over there!",
                                "I must be strong! Mekel... will find me worthy",
                                "N-no, I can't! I must get into the academy!",
                                "I... n-no, please, put it away! I... I can't accept any",
                                "N-no... no, I'm not. I'd like nothing better, however. Th-that's... that's why I'm here.",
                                "Th-thank you... wish me luck."
                        ],
                        "Prospective Sith Student (Twi'lek Male)": [
                                "P-please, Master Shaardan! Give us a chance! We'll do anything to get into the academy!",
                                "Th-thank you, Shaardan. We, uh... we understand now!"
                        ],
                        "Prospective Sith Student (Female)": [
                                "Oh, of course, Shaardan! Anything you command us!"
                        ],
                        "Prospective Sith Student (Male)": [
                                "We would never oppose you!",
                                "We didn't do anything!! Please! Help us!!",
                                "Please! Help us!!",
                                "Please! Tell him to let us go, I beg you!!"
                        ]
                },
                "Prospective Sith": {
                        "Prospective Sith (Male in Czerka Store)": [
                                "Alright. Goodbye.",
                                "No. You're very lucky, that's all I meant.",
                                "Uhh... greetings. You wouldn't happen to be looking for a prospect for the academy, would you?",
                                "Look, you've already got your ticket into the academy... there's no need to gloat, is there?",
                                "Hey! You've got one of the medallions!",
                                "What does that mean? It means that you've been accepted into the academy. All you have to do is bring that to Yuthura Ban in the cantina. Didn't the Sith who gave you that tell you?",
                                "Got any advice for someone who's trying to be worthy of admittance?",
                                "Oh really? What do you know, anyway? Get away from me.",
                                "Hmph. Fine. Keep your secrets to yourself. See if I care.",
                                "Oh? So... so there's some secret to it after all? I (knew) it!",
                                "Please, please tell me what I have to do! I'll do anything!",
                                "I... but, ugh... I guess you're right. If I can't even figure this out, what hope do I have?",
                                "(sigh) I guess this is for the best. Maybe it's time to take up dew farming.",
                                "You just want one less competitor, right? Well, we'll see about that.",
                                "That doesn't really sound so easy. I guess it's to prove how brave you are, right? They won't actually kill you? Hm. I guess I'll have to find out...",
                                "That would be suicide. Trying to kill off the competition, huh? 'Thanks' for the tip.",
                                "R-really? That... that sounds like it's, heh, very dangerous. You survived it, though... maybe it isn't so bad...",
                                "Right. Do I look like I was born yesterday? Get lost.",
                                "Hey! Why didn't I think of that? Hmmm... you look a bit too tough for me. I'll go and find someone a bit easier. Thanks a lot!",
                                "You're just trying to get me into trouble, aren't you? I'll pass, thanks anyway.",
                                "Yeah, go on.",
                                "If I thought I could take it... ahhh, no, never mind. Just go on and quit lording it over me, will you?",
                                "Oh... uh, yes of course."
                        ],
                        "Prospective Sith (Female Twi'lek)": [
                                "You... are one of the Sith from the academy, yes? Would you happen to be looking for new prospects?",
                                "So you're already part of the academy. I am unimpressed.",
                                "You... you have a medallion!",
                                "Why would you ask that? The Sith who gave you that must have mentioned that it represented your acceptance. All you have to do is bring it to Yuthura Ban at the cantina and you're in!",
                                "Might you have any advice for me? How did you obtain it?",
                                "I see. Well, keep your secrets to yourself, then. I'll find a way.",
                                "So you're not going to tell me. (sigh) I suppose I really didn't expect you to.",
                                "So there (is) a secret to it. I knew there had to be!",
                                "Would you tell me what it is? I'll do anything to know!",
                                "I... but... oh, you're right. It's hopeless.",
                                "(sigh) I... I guess I should go home. Perhaps I could get a job at the droid shop...",
                                "My family couldn't talk me out of this, and you sure aren't going to. Thanks anyway.",
                                "Oh. I'm not much of a combatant... but I guess you have to be brave if you're going to get into the Sith, right? I'll... have to think about it.",
                                "That sounds like it would be suicide. You are obviously lying to me.",
                                "Hmm... I suppose that might work. A newly accepted student wouldn't have all the powers of the other Sith, would they? Thank you!",
                                "Take a medallion that doesn't belong to me? I doubt that would work. But thank you regardless.",
                                "R-really? (gulp!) That... that sounds like it's very dangerous. You survived it, though... maybe it isn't so bad...",
                                "Jump in the chasm? Do I look like an idiot? No thanks.",
                                "May the Force serve you well.",
                                "I doubt I could take it from you if I tried. Good luck in your training, I suppose.",
                                "Oh... yes. Sorry.",
                                "N-no, of course not! I wish I was as lucky as you, that's all."
                        ],
                        "Prospective Sith (Female Twi'lek Cantina Entrance)": [
                                "What do you want?",
                                "I'm trying to get into the Sith academy. Around here they call us 'hopefuls'.",
                                "Well... that's the only way to become a Sith, isn't it? In the academy you learn to use the Force.",
                                "After the Sith conquer the galaxy there aren't going to be any more Jedi, are there? I guess I'd rather join the winning side.",
                                "I thought they were good... but I've been here for days, now, and I haven't drawn any attention at all.",
                                "I suppose that might be good, I don't know. Some of the 'attention' the Sith have shown to other hopefuls has been pretty... deadly.",
                                "(sigh) I wish I knew, to tell you the truth. You have to impress one of the Sith, I guess. Either way, it's Yuthura Ban who makes the final decision.",
                                "She's a Twi'lek Sith master, I hear. Very high rank. She's the one who decides which hopefuls make it and which ones don't.",
                                "I really couldn't say. I hear that sometimes she comes out into the colony to drink at the cantina, though, but I guess she could be anywhere.",
                                "There's not much I could tell you. Unless you're a hopeful... are you?",
                                "There are people who come here all the time to try to get into the Sith academy. I'm one of them."
                        ],
                        "Prospective Sith (Doomed Rodian)": [
                                "P-please, friend... we are pleased at your success, but..."
                        ],
                        "Prospective Sith (Doomed Twi'lek)": [
                                "Somebody help me!! Please!!"
                        ],
                        "Prospective Sith (Twi'lek southeast corner)": [
                                "You are so lucky. You got accepted into the academy, didn't you? I'm beginning to think I never will. (sigh)",
                                "Can you imagine if I actually became a Sith? The power I'd have! I could do anything!!"
                        ],
                        "Prospective Sith (Human Male)": [
                                "You are so lucky. You got accepted into the academy, didn't you? I'm beginning to think I'm never going to make it.",
                                "Can you imagine if I actually became a Sith? The power I would have! I could do anything!!"
                        ],
                        "Prospective Sith (Male Northeast)": [
                                "Something you need?",
                                "Nobody you need to know. I'm just here to try to get into the Sith academy.",
                                "Why? Why?! That's a really dumb question. To become a Sith, of course! To wield the greatest power in the galaxy!",
                                "Hah! They're weaklings not worth anyone's attention! It's the Sith that are going to conquer the galaxy, after all.",
                                "I don't know. I've been here for a few days now, and the Sith still haven't paid me any attention.",
                                "I suppose I should consider myself lucky. I've heard of some of the prospects getting killed. Still... it's all a test. I'll just have to be strong!",
                                "Well... you have to impress one of the Sith. The final decision rests with Yuthura Ban, however.",
                                "She's the one who decides exactly which of us get into the academy or not. I've been hanging out hoping she'll come by and notice me, to be honest.",
                                "Usually she's in the academy, but sometimes she comes out into the colony to look for prospects.",
                                "If she's in the colony, she can usually be found in the cantina, but not always. She's one of the most powerful Sith in the academy, I hear.",
                                "Look, I'll answer questions if a Sith puts them to me, but not otherwise.",
                                "I mean I'm here to get into the academy, and I'll do whatever it takes to succeed."
                        ]
                },
                "Rodian": {
                        "Rodian (Dreshdae)": [
                                "Excuse me, sentient. I do not think it wise to speak to you.",
                                "I must go to the office of the Czerka company. That is where business is transacted.",
                                "This planet is controlled by the Sith. They are the supreme law here, and I suggest you be wary of them.",
                                "I have only recently come to this planet, myself. My apologies if I cannot help you.",
                                "Many sentients come to this planet to attempt to enter the Sith academy. I understand most die in the process. How unfortunate.",
                                "There is a building called the cantina which is a place of recreation.",
                                "Taris has been destroyed. This portends ill for the future, sentient.",
                                "If you are wise, you will avoid the Sith on this planet, sentient. They do as they wish and many are killed without regret.",
                                "I must be on my way, sentient. My ship leaves very soon."
                        ],
                        "Rodian (Davik's Estate)": [
                                "Who you? Why you here? Get out or me call guards!",
                                "Get out. No bother me more!",
                                "No - no question! You get out or me get mad!",
                                "I mad now! See how you like me call guards! You die now!",
                                "Why you not leave me alone? What you want this time?"
                        ]
                },
                "Selkath": {
                        "Wandering Selkath 1": [
                                "The government may not be willing to say anything, but we citizens in the water know what you've done!",
                                "Your Republic has provoked us too much! Surely our government will punish the Republic for attempting to harm us!",
                                "The Sith have been cruelly sabotaged... We  will track down the culprits who have disobeyed our laws and punish them severely!",
                                "The case of Sunry from the Republic is a perfect example of why off-worlders should be expelled from Manaan!",
                                "Interrupting another who is not interested in conversation is considered rude on this planet, off-worlder!"
                        ],
                        "Wandering Selkath 2": [
                                "Many say that the Republic has had something to do with the economic restriction our people have placed on all trade. I hope it is not true.",
                                "The Republic has been acting against our will I fear. While we do not hold it against you personally, we must revise our opinions of your government.",
                                "It is most distressing that the Sith Embassy should have been invaded as it has. It makes us Selkath seem like we are failing in our duties...",
                                "I find it shocking that a hero of the Republic - Sunry - could do such a thing. Perhaps I have been wrong in my judgment of the Republic.",
                                "The Sith have tried to manipulate our courts time and again, seeking power for themselves. I hope our government decides to do more against this.",
                                "Greetings, off-worlder. While I do not have time to converse with you, I hope you find what you are looking for here on Manaan."
                        ],
                        "Selkath near Kolto Distro": [
                                "You are either brave or foolish, off-worlder, to walk our streets so boldly.",
                                "The Sith have been the target of some sort of attack recently... If the Republic was behind this, they will face stiff penalties.",
                                "You have done the Selkath a great service, off-worlder.",
                                "This is a private conversation, off-worlder."
                        ],
                        "Unfriendly Selkath (Ahto East)": [
                                "I have no wish to talk with your kind, off-worlder! I have heard the rumors. We Selkath know your kind are to blame for the poor kolto harvest.",
                                "Consult your own diplomat if you have questions, off-worlder. If you do not know of him, go to the Republic enclave and find him.",
                                "He is paid to be of service to your kind - I am not. I believe this concludes our conversation.",
                                "First you interrupt my thoughts, then you scuttle off. You off-worlders are a curious bunch. It is no wonder I find so few of you worth talking to.",
                                "If you are fool enough to draw your weapon, you will find yourself locked up for a long, long time.",
                                "I have nothing further to say to a thug such as you.",
                                "We have a saying here on Manaan - you can know the what is beneath the water by the ripples on the surface. Do you understand, off-worlder?",
                                "The Manaan authorities may not have the proof to proceed with official diplomatic sanctions against the Republic, but we Selkath know who is to blame.",
                                "I see no further point in continuing this conversation.",
                                "We know that you have some connection with the souring of relations between our government and the Republic. Whatever your Republic may be up to, we Selkath shall find out!",
                                "Your kind has done nothing but disrupt our lives since you came here! We want nothing to do with any of you!",
                                "Why do you disturb me, off-worlder? Are you trying to recruit me to your cause? You should save your lung gas - this Selkath's neutrality is not for sale.",
                                "It is well known that off-worlders have been recruiting the Selkath to join their organizations in an effort to undermine Manann's neutrality.",
                                "Just recently the Sith were given harsh diplomatic penalties for these actions. Now you are trying to recruit me.",
                                "So you say, off-worlder... but I have my doubts. I believe this conversation is completed.",
                                "Why are you disturbing me, off-worlder? I did not indicate I wished to converse with you."
                        ],
                        "Busy Selkath": [
                                "You are not welcome here, human. You have disrupted our production severely and I have no wish to speak to you.",
                                "You are not welcome here, human. You have threatened our world with your actions and I have no wish to speak to you.",
                                "You kind is too disruptive and agressive to speak to, human. We have heard of the incident at the Sith Embassy and wish no further disruptions here.",
                                "Why are you disturbing me? Can you not see I am overseeing the packaging of this kolto?",
                                "I have far more pressing matters than any questions you might have, off-worlder.",
                                "You obviously are in the wrong place, off-worlder. I suggest you visit the courthouse west of here - there you may be of some use to the Selkath instead of a hinderance.",
                                "The kolto is not mine - I am merely coordinator of this shipment.",
                                "Such negotiations are worked out between intergalactic governments and the Ahto City Export Authority.",
                                "You obviously are in the wrong place, off-worlder. I suggest you leave.",
                                "Good! Your intrusion has already wrought havoc upon my hectic schedule."
                        ]
                },
                "Selkath Guard": {
                        "Selkath Constable": [
                                "Is this true human? Are you threatening this woman with violence?",
                                "Insults are one thing, human. Threats of physical violence are quite another. They are expressly forbidden by the laws of Ahto City.",
                                "Very well, I shall overlook this infraction. But you would be wise to watch your words in the future, human.",
                                "Apologies are not sufficient. The law must be upheld.",
                                "Yes - you are correct, human. The Sith is the one at fault.",
                                "Come with me to the Ahto City prisons. We will alert your Embassy and you shall be released when they pay the fine.",
                                "Though I've known the Sith to let their people languish in the prison for many months before securing their release.",
                                "A strange interpretation of these events, human. One I do not share. Clearly you are the one at fault here.",
                                "Human, you are fined 100 credits for disturbing the Manaan peace. If you do not pay, you will be taken to the Manaan prisons.",
                                "Then you shall be imprisoned until you can pay the fine.",
                                "Further disturbances will be dealt with in a similar manner.",
                                "Perhaps a 500 credit fine and a stint in the Ahto City jails will teach you to respect our laws.",
                                "I am not deaf, human. I heard your words, and threatening physical violence is not permitted in Ahto City.",
                                "We are watching you off-worlder... We know that you have had some influence in recent events",
                                "Obey our laws here on Manaan, off-worlder. A law-abiding visitor is a visitor that does not go to prison."
                        ],
                        "Selkath Warden": [
                                "You have been charged with flagrant violations of the Ahto City laws, and insubordination towards a Selkath constable. The fine is 500 credits.",
                                "You will stay here in the prison until your fine is paid.",
                                "You will find our prices are fair human. After selling your equipment, speak to me again to pay your fine.",
                                "Perhaps we were wrong about you, human. You may go.",
                                "Your money will be confiscated and you will be deported to your ship. Similar offences will be dealt with in an equally harsh manner.",
                                "You are now free to go, human. Remember to keep the peace, or you will face the penalties once more.",
                                "Then we will confiscate what money you have and you will be deported to your ship. Similar offences will be dealt with in an equally harsh manner.",
                                "You will stay here in the prison until your fine of 100 credits is paid.",
                                "You try to influence my mind! We do not tolerate disrespect for the law here on Manaan."
                        ],
                        "Selkath Guard (Holding Cells)": [
                                "Only the Arbiters are permitted into the prison cells",
                                "Sunry's trial is over, human. You are no longer an Arbiter of the Selkath courts. I cannot allow you into the cells.",
                                "You may come and go as you please, Arbiter - you will find the door unlocked.",
                                "If you wish to begin your trial, you must make the request with the warden. It shall then be passed on to the judges."
                        ]
                },
                "Sith Apprentice": {
                        "Female Sith Apprentice outside NS Tomb": [
                                "You there! How is it that you are leaving Naga Sadow's tomb by yourself?",
                                "What? You... but you aren't even a Sith, yet! Surely you jest!",
                                "You lie!",
                                "It... it's a spy! Quick, to arms!",
                                "Well, you've found it! If you've done anything to Master Uthar, you're going to pay for it!",
                                "Don't be such a coward! Kill the traitor! Do it now!!",
                                "Don't be a sniveling coward! I will prove this one a spy",
                                "You lie! You could never have killed the master!!",
                                "You are not Revan! Quick, attack the traitor!!",
                                "If Master Uthar is dead, then he was a weak fool!"
                        ],
                        "Male Sith Apprentice outside NS Tomb": [
                                "But... what if Master Uthar is really dead? How can we hope to stand up against someone who could kill him?",
                                "But... if the spy was able to kill Master Uthar...",
                                "But... even if it's not Revan... what if Master Uthar is actually dead?"
                        ],
                        "Murderous Sith Apprentice": [
                                "Ha ha! Once you become a Sith, you can do anything!",
                                "Pleased?! You're jealous! You're jealous of my power!",
                                "Ha ha ha! See?! I have the power to do anything!",
                                "Sniveling fool! Like you would ever belong beside me in the academy!",
                                "What's this? It seems I have an audience. Look, Jedi",
                                "You can't stop me! You first, human, and then she dies!!",
                                "I am a Sith, now! My power is supreme! Prepare to die, ha ha!!",
                                "Yeah? Well I just decided that Jedi make much better sport",
                                "Oh, yeah? Well I just decided I don't need any witnesses.",
                                "What's this? It seems I have an audience. Look, human... just keep walking"
                        ],
                        "Sith Apprentice with Ladowe 1": [
                                "I hate Jedi... and these fallen ones are worse! They always get into the academy",
                                "Enough to crush this fool! Let's do it, Lashowe!",
                                "Stop it, this is boring. Let's just go back to the academy.",
                                "I didn't think it was funny.",
                                "Let me kill this one, Lashowe!",
                                "I've heard this one before, I think...",
                                "Ha ha ha! Good one!",
                                "Oh, get over yourself already. I'm tired of this.",
                                "Stop it, this is boring. Let's just go back to the academy.",
                                "Ahhh, I hate this kind of whining. Do they always have to beg for mercy?"
                        ],
                        "Sith Apprentice with Ladowe 2": [
                                "Looks pretty fresh to me, Lashowe.",
                                "Ha ha! Looks like this one's not afraid of you at all, Lashowe.",
                                "Heh... ha ha! I think someone just stood up to you, Lashowe.",
                                "Yeah? Anytime!",
                                "Hah! Too funny!",
                                "Yeah, this one's got some backbone, at least. Let's go.",
                                "Heh! That's the oldest joke in the book.",
                                "Yeah, let's get out of here."
                        ]
                },
                "Sith Guard": {
                        "Leviathan Guard": [
                                "Come on, girlie. Into the cell.",
                                "You think you're pretty funny, don't you? But you're only making things worse for yourself.",
                                "Maybe a little time in solitary confinement will teach you the proper respect for the Sith!",
                                "That's funny. You should tell that one to the torturer when he comes to deal with you.",
                                "No snappy comeback this time? The thought of torture scares you, hmm?",
                                "It may be a few hours before your torture begins; we're busy interrogating your friends right now."
                        ],
                        "Sith Guard (Valley of Dark Lords)": [
                                "The second tomb on the left within the valley is the tomb of Naga Sadow. It is off-limits to all students, unless they are in the company of Master Uthar.",
                                "Beware of the tuk'ata. They are a pack beast that have their nests in one of the tombs. We fight them off as best we can.",
                                "There is an old Sith hermit that has been haunting this area, we understand. Watch out for him.",
                                "A dangerous assassin droid has barricaded itself within the tomb of Marka Ragnos, the first one on the left. Be wary.",
                                "Watch out for the tuk'ata. They will charge you on sight. Run back to the excavation area and we can protect you.",
                                "Any artifacts found should be brought to the attention of Master Uthar immediately.",
                                "I am not here to get you out of trouble if you do something stupid, student. Enter the tombs at your own risk."
                        ],
                        "Sith Guard (Lower City)": [
                                "Another patrol heading down to the Lower City, eh?",
                                "You better watch yourself: those gangs will take a shot at anyone - even us!",
                                "Look, you've already shown me your authorization so you can go on down to the Lower City anytime you want.",
                                "Just be careful down there. Those swoop gangs will take a shot at anybody.",
                                "This elevator is off limits. Only Sith patrols and those with proper authorization",
                                "It's obvious from the way you're dressed that you're not one of the Sith patrols",
                                "Well why didn't you say so? Hmmm... everything seems to be in order.",
                                "If you were supposed to have them you'd know where to get them.",
                                "I'm not here to give you information! I work for the Sith",
                                "Move along then."
                        ]
                },
                "Sith Guard (Valley of Dark Lords)": [
                        "Sith Guard (Valley of Dark Lords) 1",
                        "Sith Guard (Valley of Dark Lords) 2"
                ],
                "Sith Soldier": {
                        "Taunting Sith Soldier": [
                                "Hey - this street is for Sith only. You got to pay a 20 credit toll to walk down this street.",
                                "Thanks for the credits, nerf-herder!",
                                "Hiding behind the Selkath laws - typical Republic cowardice!",
                                "You talk big - but remember what we did to Taris. Maybe you're next on our list.",
                                "Hey, you working for the Republic? You look like a Republic agent - I can see the cowardice in your eyes.",
                                "You think you can impress me by spouting a bunch of Jedi garbage?",
                                "Are you threatening me? It's illegal to try to start a fight in Ahto City!",
                                "The Selkath claim neutrality, but you're always giving preferential treatment to the Republic! I'm going to report this incident to the Sith Embassy!",
                                "Me? I didn't do anything! This is an outrage! A travesty of justice!",
                                "I'll get you for this, Jedi! The Sith won't stand for this!",
                                "Out of my way - unless you want to feel the wrath of the Sith!",
                                "You dare mock me? If it wasn't for the Selkath laws I'd teach you proper respect!",
                                "The wrath of the Sith is a terrible thing! Remember Taris! You'll see - you'll all see!"
                        ],
                        "Confrontational Sith Soldier": [
                                "Your precious Republic's days are numbered!",
                                "You're a fool! When the Sith descend on Coruscant, our numbers will block out the sun itself!",
                                "That can be arranged. Remember what happened to Taris",
                                "Now it is you who underestimate our resolve.",
                                "What's this? Another Republic lackey wandering the streets?",
                                "I have nothing more to say to you. I have important Sith business to tend to.",
                                "Save your empty threats. If you're stupid enough to attack me the Selkath authorities will lock you away",
                                "Let me guess... Dark Lord of the Sith?",
                                "HAHAHAHAHAHAHA! Revan, right?",
                                "HAHAHAHA! You moron! Revan's dead!",
                                "Now some of us have serious work to do."
                        ],
                        "Sith Soldier Guarding Elevator": [
                                "Hold on - where do you think you're going? This area is restricted to Undercity patrols!",
                                "Let me see... hmmm, these look to be in order. Okay, you can go down if you want.",
                                "The Undercity is crawling with mutants. Rakghouls, they call 'em.",
                                "I don't know how they do things in the Upper City, but down here we follow our orders to the letter!",
                                "So just march on back to the base, talk to your commanding officer and tell him",
                                "You just made a big mistake!",
                                "Good... I don't have time for this foolishness. Down here we run a tight ship",
                                "Hold on there, civilian! Only those with official Sith business are allowed into the Undercity.",
                                "Unless you've got the proper security papers you better just turn around and go back the way you came.",
                                "You can't... not unless you're on official Sith business.",
                                "I'm not here to answer your questions. My orders are to guard the elevator.",
                                "Hey, you've already shown me your security clearance.",
                                "Just be careful down there. Watch out for those rakghouls!"
                        ],
                        "Patrolling Sith Soldier (Ahto West)": [
                                "Kolto's real scarce all of a sudden. From what I hear, the Republic is to blame.",
                                "I don't have time to listen to your stories - I've got a full shipment of kolto to load before my shift is over.",
                                "We've got all the proper kolto trading permits, so back off."
                        ],
                        "Sith Soldier (Manaan)": [
                                "You Republic people are so pathetic, sitting around grovelling at the tablescraps the galactic senators deign to give you. It makes me sick.",
                                "Ha! Don't make me laugh, you gutless simp! It's the destiny of weak-minded fools like you to be ruled over by the strong, like we Sith!",
                                "Try it. Just try it. I'd love to see you throw the first punch. And with all the cameras around the Selkath would be all over you inside of 30 seconds.",
                                "You break their laws, you pay the price, Republic scum. But I can see that you're not man enough to back up your words anyway.",
                                "If you ever feel like relieving yourself of your worthless existence, feel free to come by our enclave here. We have many, many ways to fulfill your wish.",
                                "You Republics make me sick. It's a good thing there are cameras all over the place on Manaan, or they'd have droids cleaning you up off the walls by now."
                        ],
                        "Sith Soldier (Northeast)": [
                                "You Republics sicken me! We'll do the galaxy a favor by wiping you out!"
                        ],
                        "Patrolling Sith Soldier (Ahto East)": [
                                "The Selkath have slapped heavy export restrictions on kolto for everyone.",
                                "Our Embassy has been closed temporarily because someone dropped a wrench in the elevator.",
                                "That slime Sunry got free after killing one of us! If I ever meet his Arbiter in the street...",
                                "We got revenge for Elassa in the trial! Finally we get some justice from those fish-headed freaks!",
                                "These Selkath don't know what they're going to miss. When the Sith Empire finally crushes the Republic"
                        ],
                        "Sith Soldier Lackey": [
                                "Back off, Republic scum! A man like you couldn't hope to satisfy a Sith woman!",
                                "Back off, Republic dog! You couldn't hope to compare to a real woman!"
                        ],
                        "Sith Soldier (talking to Yortal)": [
                                "You got any armor plating for my swoop bike?",
                                "I thought this garbage was free! You actually sell this junk? You fish are a strange breed.",
                                "Don't worry, junkman, when I want garbage I'll be back!"
                        ],
                        "Female Sith Soldier (Swoop Registration)": [
                                "Move along, off-worlder. I've had enough of you.",
                                "What do we have here? A lost off-worlder, perhaps?",
                                "Wait, I recognize you. I watched you take top prize at the swoop tournament.",
                                "I'm no guide. The Sith don't suffer questions for long.",
                                "Are you hoping that I will look more favorably on you because you have taken the Sector Champion title? You are mistaken.",
                                "I am fond of the sport, true, but it's more about hating racers I don't think should win than actually paying tribute to those I favor.",
                                "Hukta Jax shows the proper spirit of competition, and it has brought him to the top before.",
                                "The Gamorrean? You're joking.",
                                "Brute force to the finish, he's very efficient.",
                                "Then seek out a helpful fish for answers. I have no interest in the affairs of the Selkath and you have no reason to inquire about mine.",
                                "What did you say? You don't want trouble from me, friend.",
                                "So, you have some courage. Dumb as a B'omarr castoff",
                                "Even if you expected to live through my attack, the Selkath would lock you up for fighting in their streets.",
                                "Ah, so you wish to goad (me) into action so the Selkath turn their unyielding laws my way?",
                                "You've made your jest on the one world where you would not be immediately struck down",
                                "I thought you might. Walk away. Now.",
                                "I'm sure you didn't. Walk away. Now.",
                                "Of course you do. Good riddance.",
                                "What do I think? I think it's a shame when an unworthy newcomer unseats his betters. I am not easily won as a supporter.",
                                "I believe Queedle Molta has taken top spot. I prefer the professional racers. His win was just a fluke. An aberration.",
                                "I hate the rabble the races attract. They're always trouble.",
                                "What do you want now? You press your luck, pestering a Sith soldier.",
                                "Don't count on the small measure of celebrity you have attained at the swoop races.",
                                "As I have said in the past, the swoop races attract the lowest of rabble."
                        ],
                        "Sith Soldier (Northwest)": [
                                "Malak will show you Republics how a war is really waged!"
                        ],
                        "Male Sith Soldier (Swoop Registration)": [
                                "Go away. You would regret the only other option.",
                                "What do you want, rail-rat? I don't have the time or desire to bother speaking with wandering idiots.",
                                "Go talk with your adoring fans over at the swoop races.",
                                "I will get tired of your voice in short order, so make it quick.",
                                "You're the Sector Champion; you know the races inside and out.",
                                "Nothing about the current state of the races make me want to watch. Especially if it means associating with the cattle grouped in there now.",
                                "I admire the mercenary spirit of Casandra Mateil. Other than that, no one.",
                                "Her mercenary spirit isn't what's selling the autoprints.",
                                "She does have... other qualities as well.",
                                "Grow some gills and swim the planet yourself. There's no substitute for personal experience.",
                                "Hostile? I would consider this the height of calm for dealing with insects like yourself.",
                                "Yes, Manaan is a very unsatisfying world for settling disagreements.",
                                "Since we both refuse to initiate a violent event, you'll have to accept my contempt-filled dismissal,",
                                "Wisely played. Go away.",
                                "Good. This visit was dragging on.",
                                "Our Taris campaign killed the giants of the sport. The current racers are hardly inspiring. An Aqualish champion? Hmph. Laughable.",
                                "You're probably another race fan in a fool's stupor after that big win by local whelp Queedle Molta.",
                                "Go join the other transients in the swoop race area. At least you'll all be contained.",
                                "Why are you back again? I didn't show enough disinterest the first time around?",
                                "Go look for fans over at the swoop races, Sector Champion.",
                                "I shouldn't expect you to listen. You're probably just another open-mouthed fool"
                        ]
                },
                "Sith Soldier Lackey": [
                        "Sith Soldier Lackey 1",
                        "Sith Soldier Lackey 2"
                ],
                "Sith Student": {
                        "Tamlen": [
                                "Greetings. You're one of the new hopefuls, aren't you? I imagine you're eager to garner some prestige for Master Uthar.",
                                "My name is Tamlen. I'm assigned here to the library... mostly keeping it up to date with new discoveries and such.",
                                "I am adding new entries into our library's database based on the excavations in the valley.",
                                "Ajunta Pall was one of the first of the great Sith Lords... at least, according to the ruins here on Korriban. One of the tombs out in the Valley of the Dark Lords belongs to him.",
                                "He wielded a powerful sword, by all accounts. Some of us believe it might be in that tomb, which is quite exciting.",
                                "According to legend, Ajunta Pall forged a sword imbued with the essence of the dark side. Someone who found it could gain considerable prestige.",
                                "Some unsuccessful attempts have been made. I truly don't know why a more concerted effort isn't made, however.",
                                "You simply need to follow the east passage... there's an exit there which will lead you up to the surface. Look for Tariga... she is in that area and can probably help you.",
                                "Isn't that what you're interested in? Although I suppose you could also keep it...",
                                "Well... the legends say the sword had dark power, but that may only be a story. We will never know unless we can examine it more closely.",
                                "I imagine you've got a lot to do.",
                                "How do you do? Excuse me... I must return to my studies.",
                                "Hmm. Is that the sword of Ajunta Pall you have there? Fascinating. If it truly is, you might want to hand that over to Master Uthar, no?",
                                "The very same.",
                                "A little. Some of us believe it may be found in his tomb in the Valley of the Dark Lords. Whoever found the sword could gain great prestige.",
                                "Hmm. That depends. Do you know anything about Ajunta Pall?",
                                "Still working to earn prestige, are you?"
                        ],
                        "Sith Student (outside Marka Ragnos Tomb)": [
                                "I heard an explosion in there... did you destroy the assassin droid?",
                                "Oh. Well, I guess it's good that the deed is done. Hope you stomped it good for my friends.",
                                "At any rate, if you haven't already, you might want to go and see Master Uthar about that reward.",
                                "Well... if you did, then I wouldn't have to think about going inside, after all.",
                                "No, I wouldn't do that. Well... I would if I could get away with it, but I bet Master Uthar",
                                "Wow... you should have seen it. That droid came running out of the tomb like a bantha on a rampage!",
                                "It fired some kind of jet pack and off it went. Whatever you did, it sure was effective...",
                                "You'd better go and tell Master Uthar about this, if you haven't already. You may not have destroyed the droid",
                                "You should be careful if you're planning on entering this tomb... it's dangerous.",
                                "There's an assassin droid in here, so Master Uthar says. It went insane and has holed up in here",
                                "I don't know. I think Master Uthar has left it in there as a challenge for any student brave enough to destroy it.",
                                "Supposedly, if a student actually succeeds in destroying the droid, they'll get a great reward. Lots have tried, but nobody's succeeded yet.",
                                "No idea. I think it's building them in there.",
                                "Seems that way. They say that its audio receptors became too sensitive and all the noise drove the droid nuts.",
                                "If you're planning on going in, I'd suggest you use some sound suppressors or something... or you'll probably become a target right away.",
                                "I... I don't think so. I can manipulate minds and living matter, but that won't be much use against droids, will it?",
                                "I've had a few friends go inside that haven't come out for a while, now. I doubt I could do any better than they could.",
                                "Sure thing. Good luck.",
                                "If you say so. Just thought I would warn you, is all.",
                                "Maybe so, but this one more than most, I think."
                        ],
                        "Sith Student Archaeologists": [
                                "Sorry... I'm rather busy with the excavation planning, right now.",
                                "You aren't assigned to the excavation team, are you?",
                                "The tomb on the far left, there, is off-limits. Only Master Uthar can go inside.",
                                "Where is that blasted transport crew? We're supposed to send off the next shipment of artifacts right away.",
                                "Careful of the tuk'ata. It's all we can do to keep those beasts away while we work.",
                                "We've had indications that there's a whole ancient Sith colony under this valley. Isn't that an incredible find?",
                                "The tombs are all full of traps and droids that still work, it looks like. Stay out of them, if you can.",
                                "I was told that there's an escaped assassin droid in one of the tombs. Watch out for it.",
                                "One has to wonder what made the Sith leave this planet originally. I bet the Jedi came and destroyed the colony.",
                                "These tombs we've uncovered are only the tip of an entire ancient Sith fortress. I wonder what happened here?",
                                "Look, unless you're willing to lend a hand, leave us to our work.",
                                "You're out here to look for artifacts, I suppose? Just be careful.",
                                "There's supposed to be some crazy Sith hermit that keeps kidnapping students in these hills. Best be careful.",
                                "Sorry, I can't talk. We have to excavate this valley with hand instruments. There's all kinds of old traps left behind that still work."
                        ]
                },
                "Sith Teacher": {
                        "Male Sith Teacher": [
                                "There are... tremors in the Force. I fear things have changed greatly, here. Are you responsible for this?",
                                "I understand that our renegade students have been dealt with... and that you are responsible for that. Congratulations.",
                                "I hear that you have gained sufficient prestige to undertake the final test. Well done.",
                                "I am a trainer here at the academy. I think I may be able to offer you some aid in gaining prestige,",
                                "Do you know of our renegade students?",
                                "Ah. Let me tell you what I can, then.",
                                "A group of students were ordered to perform executions on civilians within the colony. They refused to carry out the orders.",
                                "Master Uthar naturally ordered them killed... but they fled before this could take place. If one could carry out Uthar's order, it would be worth considerable prestige.",
                                "There are five of them, if I remember... and they cannot be far, as they have no method to leave the planet. Likely hiding in the hills on the surface.",
                                "Now if you will excuse me, I must return to my studies.",
                                "Those are the ones. It seems you have already heard of them.",
                                "There is little more I can tell you, then. Should you locate their hiding place, you would gain considerable prestige, I am sure.",
                                "How do you do, hopeful? Seeking prestige, yes?"
                        ],
                        "Female Sith Teacher": [
                                "Bah. I hate it when things start to change so rapidly. We lose more teachers that way...",
                                "Heh heh... someone told me that you had an encounter with the 'hermit', himself.",
                                "Go on! You've gained your prestige, now, haven't you? Go take your final test already and get out of my hair!",
                                "Hmph. Another hopeful wandering about the academy? (sigh) I suppose you want to know how to get prestige?",
                                "I am one of the academy trainers, of course. You'd do well to watch your tone with me, hopeful",
                                "Oh, yes. You gather prestige to earn the opportunity to take the final test...",
                                "Hmph. As if I didn't have better things to do. Has anyone told you about Jorak Uln?",
                                "Heh. Well... the first thing you should know is that that is not a name you should mention around Master Uthar if you can avoid it.",
                                "Jorak Uln was once Uthar's master, you see, and the head of this academy. He went a little insane, however, and Uthar forced him to flee to the surface and hide.",
                                "It seems that Jorak has been spending his time kidnapping students who wander into the Valley of the Dark Lords.",
                                "If you want prestige, however, you'll find that hermit, as everyone calls him... you'll find Jorak",
                                "Now begone. I have better things to do than chat with lost hopefuls.",
                                "Pfah. He is much more than a simple hermit 'hiding in the hills', as you say.",
                                "If you've already been told about him, there's little more I can tell you. With luck, perhaps he'll kidnap you",
                                "Hah! I doubt that. Have it your way, however, off you go."
                        ]
                },
                "Sith Thug": {
                        "Female Sith Thug": [
                                "This is good: I want to celebrate my acceptance into the academy!",
                                "Hey! This one has killed Sith?!"
                        ],
                        "Twi'lek Sith Thug": [
                                "Hey! I think that was a threat!",
                                "Looks like we got us a winner!"
                        ]
                },
                "Swoop Fan": {
                        "Male Swoop Fan": [
                                "You're only as good as your last race. Remember that.",
                                "I was cheering for you. I hope I didn't jinx your race.",
                                "Your last race was a disappointment. Lose many more and the crowd will turn on you.",
                                "You'll have to do better than that if you want to be sector champion.",
                                "It's amazing what's been happeing on the track! Queedle has taken the top spot!",
                                "I always cheered Queedle before, and I guess it helped! He's beaten everyone!",
                                "Queedle has really improved out there. He was always my favorite.",
                                "Everyone thought Queedle couldn't compete because he was just a local racer, but he's shown them all.",
                                "I was down here last week and I got Casandra Mateil's autoprint. She doesn't do that very often.",
                                "You'll have to get in line for the good seats when the races start. There's a lot of people that want to see them.",
                                "Sure the swoop circuit is suffering a bit with Taris gone, but we still have some good racers to watch.",
                                "Have you been to the swoop races before? Some of these riders are sure full of themselves.",
                                "I sure hope you're staying here. Beating the first round has made you look pretty good to the crowd.",
                                "You're not bad for a beginner. It's almost like you've competed at this level before.",
                                "You won't have such an easy run in the second round. We get some experienced riders through here.",
                                "Not bad at all, but I'll start cheering when you prove you're not just using beginner's luck.",
                                "Some of the crowd may turn on you. You're not the underdog anymore.",
                                "You're surprising a lot of people. Me included. Nice job out there.",
                                "If you win again, I'll be absolutely amazed. You are moving up so fast.",
                                "Nice race. How do you go so fast? Are you sure your swoop is legal?",
                                "Well, you've captured the sector championship. I have to say I've never seen such an... impressive racer.",
                                "I didn't think you had it in you, but I guess I was wrong. You've really won me over, champion.",
                                "You handled that race like a pro. I like confident men.",
                                "Racers like you are why I watch the sport. You dominated the whole field. It was... exhilarating.",
                                "Ha. I've never seen anyone who rides like you. This has been a great tournament.",
                                "You're deadly serious out on the course. Like Hukta Jax, but with talent. You deserve to be champion.",
                                "Your win was a complete surprise to everyone. I'm sure the crowd thought you would burn out, but you showed them.",
                                "The crowd really started pulling for you in that last race. Everyone loves a winner, I guess."
                        ],
                        "Male Human Swoop Fan": [
                                "Well, I guess the course proved too much for you at this level. Better luck next time."
                        ]
                },
                "Swoop Groupie": {
                        "Female Swoup Groupie": [
                                "I love watching the races. Nothing much else to do.",
                                "Nico is the big favorite around here.",
                                "Not a lot of women on the swoop circuit. Not that there's much of a circuit left.",
                                "I Don't know how the riders do it. I get sick at speeds like that.",
                                "That's really too bad about your last race. You should have won it for sure.",
                                "I guess the pressure got to you out there. It's not the first time a racer lost their edge.",
                                "Your loss wasn't the worst I've seen. I saw Yuka's big crash on Taris two years ago.",
                                "I guess you're not quite up to taking the big prize. It's a shame.",
                                "You are quite the racer. Too bad there isn't much of a circuit anymore.",
                                "Too bad about Garm's time being beat, but he's just starting out. You're looking like you've been at this a while.",
                                "Yuka Rill isn't going to like you. He doesn't do well against new competition, and you're up against his time next.",
                                "So, was your win beginners luck? Most of the amateurs get stuck at about this level.",
                                "I bet Motta's going to start looking at you as a potential champ. Your times just keep getting better.",
                                "It's amazing the way you are shooting up the ranks. I haven't seen racing like that since Nico started getting good.",
                                "Yuka Rill won't recover from the loss you handed him anytime soon. That Ithorian's a sore loser.",
                                "You've beaten all the local talents. Only Zoriis is left, and she's a pro. Well, Nico too.",
                                "I have to say, you are looking very impressive to me right now. I hope you stick around.",
                                "I like having a champion around, but you're probably destined for the circuit, once it's back up and running.",
                                "I like a man that can move fast when he needs to. Maybe I could trouble you for an autoprint... or something.",
                                "You sure do look good out there on the track, champion. You look pretty good here too.",
                                "That was some impressive racing. Good to see you and Zoriis put the boys to shame",
                                "That was some good racing. Best time of the season, I think.",
                                "What are you doing here when you can race like that? If the circuit were up, you'd be a star!",
                                "You are too good for Tatooine, you know that? The best I've ever seen.",
                                "I saw some footage of Taris before the Sith destroyed it... I swear I saw you... couldn't be.",
                                "Did I see your bike getting prepped? Not many new ones like that come through here.",
                                "It's sad... one of our racers was on Taris. Ever race there? Probably not, I'd have heard of you.",
                                "I'm surprised to see a new racer. How do you keep your bike running? Parts are scarce around here."
                        ],
                        "Male Swoop Groupie": [
                                "Gotta like the races. There's nothing else, so you'd better.",
                                "Every now and then we push a new obstacle on the course to keep it fresh. Good luck out there.",
                                "Got a favorite racer? Nico's good, but Garm's a real pro.",
                                "It's too bad about Taris. The destruction there has really hurt the swoop circuit.",
                                "I suppose I've seen racers do worse than you did, but you'd better show your skills on the next run.",
                                "You're losing fans every race you lose. You'd better tighten up out there.",
                                "Not the worst I've seen, but you'll have to do better if you want to make the circuit.",
                                "You didn't look so good out there on that last race. Desert sun getting to you?",
                                "Watch your bike around here. You're doing all right, and the last thing you want is it to get stripped for parts.",
                                "Taris was a good track, but their racers were uptight. You win, and you look like you enjoy yourself.",
                                "That was a pretty good showing out there. Maybe you're not just another sand-skimming nerf herder.",
                                "If you're such a good racer, why are you here? Maybe you've done as good as you're going to.",
                                "Motta wants Tatooine to be the new Taris for races. A few more newcomers with your skills and he might do it.",
                                "Yuka Rill will be crying for days... or whatever it is Ithorians do. You beat his time into the ground!",
                                "I'm looking forward to seeing you go against Zoriis Bafka's time. She's been a pro for years.",
                                "You're almost good enough to go pro, you know? I'll be cheering for you in the next race.",
                                "You are an absolute terror on the track! Are you sure you're not a pro already?",
                                "If the circuit were up you'd be famous one three... no! Four worlds by now. You're just that good!",
                                "That last race of yours was the most exciting thing to blow through Tatooine... ever.",
                                "I'm going to watch for you in the future. Your races are... just amazing.",
                                "That last race was incredible. You just keep looking better and better out there... and here as well.",
                                "You're beautiful out there, absolutely beautiful. And a pro racer as well!",
                                "Lady, you are the best. I just had to say that.",
                                "I've never seen a woman come into town and take charge like you did out there. You are scary. Wonderfully scary.",
                                "We get some decent speed on the desert. No need for expensive mods. It's good for new racers like you.",
                                "Once you've raced a bit you'll learn that this track isn't the greatest, but it gets the job done.",
                                "It's crass to say, but the destruction of Taris means more racers coming here. Like you, I bet.",
                                "You a racer? Don't sign with Motta. That's all I'm saying."
                        ]
                },
                "Tarisian Noble": {
                        "Tarisian Noble (Upper City Cantina)": [
                                "What? Why are you speaking to me? Can't you tell from my clothing that I'm of the nobility!",
                                "Get away from me - I can't be seen talking with the common rabble. It wouldn't be proper for a man of my standing."
                        ],
                        "Tarisian Noble (guest of Davik)": [
                                "How dare you invade my chambers! How rude! I am a personal guest of Davik himself!",
                                "How can Davik expect me to invest in his ventures with this kind of incompetence on display?",
                                "Well, I suppose I can forgive the intrusion in this case. Tell Davik I admire a host who has his underlings",
                                "I don't require anything right now - you can tell Davik everything about my stay",
                                "Don't work for Davik? Then what are you... oh blast!",
                                "Now scurry on back to Davik. If I find I have need of anything I'll buzz for you.",
                                "That is no excuse for incompetence! I gave very specific orders that were not followed.",
                                "What? How dare you speak to me like that! I could ask Davik",
                                "What? But... help! Assassins! Guards",
                                "You again? My instructions were not complicated. Give me one good reason why I shouldn't",
                                "Well, if you think I'm going to tip you again you're sadly mistaken."
                        ]
                },
                "Trandoshan": {
                        "Trandoshan 1": [
                                "That's not good enough, Suvam. We know you have more... and we want it now!",
                                "Who's that?",
                                "I don't think so, human.",
                                "We are... renegotiating our contract, Suvam.",
                                "We... leave... now.",
                                "You seek to mock us, human?",
                                "A friend, Suvam? You try to hire others to reneg on our deal?",
                                "We'll be back, Suvam!",
                                "We're here to teach you a lesson, Suvam. And you as well, human.",
                                "We have our ways, rodian. Just because you didn't hear us dock"
                        ],
                        "Trandoshan 2": [
                                "The Exchange is in no position to dictate orders anymore, Suvam...",
                                "A stranger... You haven't been telling us everything, now have you, Suvam?",
                                "You know what we want, Suvam. Give it to us or next time we'll take it by force.",
                                "Think on this before inviting any more of your 'friends'.",
                                "Or what? You'll force us?",
                                "But we have not forgotten you, Suvam!",
                                "We'll be back for you, human... and you as well Suvam.",
                                "The Exchange has no power over us, human! Our business is with Suvam alone.",
                                "I think not, human."
                        ]
                },
                "Woman": {
                        "Upper City Woman 1": [
                                "I'm not doing anything wrong! I'm just standing here",
                                "I can't believe the Sith put a quarantine on the planet!",
                                "I heard there's a swoop gang war in the Lower City!",
                                "Ever since the Sith quarantine Javyar's cantina is packed with off-worlders!",
                                "I heard the Sith are sending salvage teams into the Undercity."
                        ]
                },
                "Wookiee": {
                        "Generic Male Wookiee": [
                                "I won't speak with you, outsider. Chuundar allows too many of you here.",
                                "Chuundar may tolerate you, but do not expect the same from all of us.",
                                "You will never take me as a slave, outsider. By Bacca's Blade, you will not!",
                                "It was not long ago that Kashyyyk had no outsider taint.",
                                "Freyyr is back in power! Slavers will learn to fear us now!",
                                "Chuundar deserved death. He made us fearful and weak.",
                                "The honor of Kashyyyk is tainted. Only slaver blood will make things right.",
                                "Freyyr has been through much. His wrath will make us strong.",
                                "Rorworr has not returned to the village in days. If slavers took him, they had a fight on their hands.",
                                "Many are talking of Rorworr's disappearance. It is hardest on the young.",
                                "We lose more of our most promising warriors everyday.",
                                "Bacca's Blade keep Rorworr safe and Bacca's wisdom guide him home to us.",
                                "Even when serving justice, you outsiders find a way to profit. Leave me alone, mercenary.",
                                "Jaarak's fate would be easier to stomach if an outsider had not profited from it.",
                                "You surprise me with your mercy, outsider. I wouldn't have thought it possible.",
                                "The shame of Rorworr's actions will haunt us. Justice was properly merciful with his killer.",
                                "I am not accustomed to speaking with you outsiders. Some have gotten too comfortable with it, I think."
                        ],
                        "Generic Female Wookiee": [
                                "I will not speak with you, outsider. You are not worthy.",
                                "Chuundar has grown comfortable dealing with you outsiders. I have not.",
                                "Chuundar allows you to be here, outsider. You would be dead if he didn't.",
                                "First there was one outsider, then many, and now you walk our village! It's too much!",
                                "Freyyr will not let us fall to slavers. He would rather die.",
                                "It is right that Chuundar died. He was tainted by outsider greed.",
                                "Kashyyyk will rise to repel the slaver threat. Freyyr will see to it.",
                                "Freyyr will not let slavers take us. Of that, I am certain.",
                                "Rorworr is the latest of us to go missing. I hope your outsider slavers lost many men trying to cage him.",
                                "Rorworr was mentor to some of our most promising children. We need his spirit in these dark times.",
                                "Rorworr has not returned to the village. If you took him, outsider, you will pay dearly.",
                                "Do you miss your kin when they are taken from you, outsider? I doubt you feel the same as we do.",
                                "I do not like that you have seen us at our worst. Jaarak has lost his honor to an outsider.",
                                "Jaarak has shamed us. To strike down one of our own... he showed the gall of an outsider.",
                                "Your actions are unexpected. Very few outsiders have shown mercy during their stay here.",
                                "Rorworr has shamed us when we needed strength. His death will serve as a lesson in the importance of honor.",
                                "I long for the Kashyyyk of old. We had no need of footpaths for outsiders like you."
                        ],
                        "Unknown Wookiee": [
                                "Freyyr welcomes you for what you have done. The Wookiee people are in your debt.",
                                "You are the only outsider permitted in here. It is an honor.",
                                "You will be remembered for what you have done.",
                                "Freyyr will see us through this dark time, thanks to your efforts.",
                                "Speak with Chorrawl if you must speak at all. He knows your jagged language best."
                        ],
                        "Wandering Female Wookiee": [
                                "Freyyr is returned to us! The madness of Chuundar will be undone.",
                                "And you, Zaalbar, you fought for us even when shunned.",
                                "I will answer if I can.",
                                "Rorworr was missing, but you know that. You caught his killer and made sure he was executed.",
                                "I am grateful you have kept order, but the whole matter makes me sad.",
                                "I don't know about that. You outsiders from away are always looking for strange things. It makes you crazy.",
                                "Maybe you should search for that fool living in the Shadowlands.",
                                "See, you are all crazy. You can't be him.",
                                "Goodbye then. Thank you.",
                                "I don't know how he stays alive. Maybe animals won't eat crazy-meat.",
                                "Rorworr was missing, but you know that. You caught his killer and showed that justice can be merciful.",
                                "Rorworr is missing. He's one of our most promising warriors.",
                                "Woorwill and Jaarak are his friends. You could speak with them.",
                                "His friends Woorwill and Jaarak would like to hear any news. They are in Jaarak's home on the central village tree platfom.",
                                "If there was a crime, tell Worrroznor, Holder of the Laws. His home is east of the central village tree.",
                                "You taint yourself with your words. You are a friend to us.",
                                "And we are glad you did. Thank you. We will be strong again.",
                                "What can I do for you?",
                                "Leave me, human outsider. I do not wish to speak with you.",
                                "Why? So you can better exploit us? Why should I speak with you?",
                                "We are threatened everyday. You are just another body in the army we face from all sides, at all times.",
                                "Don't speak for me, mad-claw. You left in shame.",
                                "What right do you have to question Chuundar? What could you possibly know about us?",
                                "Your interest is surprising. I had not thought an outsider would care.",
                                "Chuundar is our leader, and deserving of respect. Even with our doubts.",
                                "There is no one. Chuundar is unquestioned. You have seen to that, have you not? Speak no more of it.",
                                "I should tell someone... we whisper it anyway.",
                                "Chuundar has done much. He keeps the slavers from the village, and rules fairly.",
                                "But... his father was better. Freyyr the Chieftain would not have allowed the slaver docking platforms to be built.",
                                "I don't want to think about this. You test my patience, outsider.",
                                "I would not believe you. You are an outsider. You lie. You cheat. You enslave us.",
                                "Be brief. I tire of this.",
                                "The body of Rorworr was found. He was a promising warrior. We will mourn him fiercely.",
                                "You know this. You made certain his killer was executed.",
                                "Go on, mercenary, leave me alone. I haven't the money to pay for your loyalty.",
                                "I don't know about anything like that, but I don't understand you body-bald fools.",
                                "Our hunters say one of you has been living in the Shadowlands, and that is crazy!",
                                "It's probably just hunter-tales, though. No one could live in the Shadowlands ",
                                "Maybe insanity makes you taste bad. I don't know. You tell me.",
                                "We go for ritual, to prove ourselves. Some exiles are forced to live there.",
                                "I know of none. I do not enter the Shadowlands.",
                                "Please, do not bother me again.",
                                "I am ashamed that he would ask outsiders to track such a creature.",
                                "If you must be the one, then so be it. Be merciful and quick.",
                                "And when you are through, do the same to your slave Zaalbar.",
                                "This is no secret to you. For whatever reason, you made certain justice was merciful in this matter.",
                                "I still do not trust you, but you have a small measure of thanks for this.",
                                "Another of our people is missing. If the slavers were responsible",
                                "It may be that he died in the Shadowlands. If he did",
                                "What makes it your business? Bah, I have nothing to say.",
                                "Woorwill and Jaarak maintain a vigil in Woorwil's home",
                                "His friends Woorwill and Jaarak will want to know.",
                                "Woorwill's home is on the central tree of the village.",
                                "Soon after the mad son Zaalbar was sent away.",
                                "It is thought that he died fighting slavers. I like to think so.",
                                "No, no I don't. You see, your kind are all mad.",
                                "There is no one left that is willing to stand up to the slavers.",
                                "The ancient Bacca was our greatest leader.",
                                "His sword would be the sign, and legends say we have always prospered under those that held it.",
                                "No one has seen the blade for years. It is a foolish hope.",
                                "Primitive? Our traditions are ancient! There is great order and honor in how we live!",
                                "No, I will not fear you. Ask what you will",
                                "I shall believe that when I see it. I will speak with you, but do not mistake that for trust.",
                                "You have a Wookiee marked by exile as a slave.",
                                "To an outsider? You truly are a mad-claw.",
                                "I will speak with you a moment, but do not pretend to be a friend.",
                                "Why do you bother me, human? I don't wish to speak with you."
                        ]
                },
                "Wookiee Guard": {
                        "Wookiee Guard at Boarding Ramp": [
                                "We will guard this landing place from now on.",
                                "Thank you for your assistance, outsider. I doubt",
                                "Your presence is tolerated because of how you helped us",
                                "It will be a long time before we allow ourselves",
                                "If another company comes to Kashyyyk, they will find",
                                "We will remember what happend here. Slavers will not take us again."
                        ],
                        "Wookiee Guard (Village Gates)": [
                                "GRRROWLLL, stop where you are, outsider. You enter the domain of Chuundar, Chieftain and leader!",
                                "You have no rights here, mad-claw!",
                                "Shut up! GROWWLL! You are nameless with dishonor, mad-claw!",
                                "RRaaaghh! Enough talk!",
                                "RRaaaghh! Enough! The mad-claw",
                                "The choice is made for you already!",
                                "Look about you, fool. You face a legion of Wookiees",
                                "You will be taken before Chuundar and he will judge your worth",
                                "There is no refusing. If you will not walk, we will bind you.",
                                "He will decide if you are fit to walk the village of Rwookrrorro.",
                                "Chuundar sent us to search it. We found the exile.",
                                "Freyyr has returned to us because of you, outsider.",
                                "Chuundar has said that you can remain here,"
                        ],
                        "Wookiee Guard (southeast walkway)": [
                                "By order of Chieftain Freyyr, you are allowed full access to the Shadowlands and our village. You have our thanks, outsider.",
                                "Chuundar has said you may pass into the Shadowlands. Gorwooken will lower you down in the elevator basket.",
                                "Gorwooken climbed to the basket from the upper branches, but you will have to walk, outsider.",
                                "The path is seldom used. There may be vermin nesting along it. Be ready to fight.",
                                "Grrrowwlll!! You are not permitted to pass into the Shadowlands. Only Chuundar may allow you entry.",
                                "I have already told you to take your filthy madclaw and leave. Speak with Chuundar in the village and don't bother me further.",
                                "Especially when you bring filth such as this with you. This madclaw has no place here.",
                                "And yet you travel with outsiders yourself! Speak no more! Chuundar will decide if you are permitted to enter the Shadowlands.",
                                "Speak with Chuundar in the village of Rwookrrorro. He will decide if you are worthy."
                        ],
                        "Wookiee Guard (Chieftain's Hall)": [
                                "Great Chuundar has finished with you, <FullName>.",
                                "Go, and expect no more to be said!",
                                "You have been given a task, outsider. Be thankful",
                                "You be allowed audience when you return after completing his task.",
                                "The village exit is northwest of here.",
                                "He will lower you to the Shadowlands,",
                                "If the forest holds any justice you will die down there",
                                "Others may speak to you, <FullName>, but I won't.",
                                "Return when Chuundar's task is complete."
                        ]
                },
                "Wookiee Guard at Boarding Ramp": [
                        "Wookiee Guard at Boarding Ramp 1",
                        "Wookiee Guard at Boarding Ramp 2"
                ],
                "Citizen": {
                        "Male Citizen (Korriban)": [
                                "(Sigh) I can't wait to get back to the Core systems. This planet is dangerous with all these Sith wandering around.",
                                "Whatever you do, don't try and land a ship outside the colony.",
                                "Have you heard what happened to Taris?",
                                "Yeah, the Czerka cantina's the only place to go around here for any real fun.",
                                "You're not here to try and get into the Sith academy, are you?",
                                "There are a lot of young folk who come here hoping to get admitted to the Sith academy here in Dreshdae.",
                                "This planet belongs to the Sith.",
                                "Err... you're a Sith, right? (ahem) Excuse me..."
                        ],
                        "Twi'lek Female Citizen": [
                                "Err... you're a Sith, right? Excuse me...",
                                "This planet belongs to the Sith. They allow Czerka to run the starport and a few mines, but the Sith are the ones in control.",
                                "There are a lot of young folk who come here hoping to get admitted to the Sith academy here in Dreshdae. Few ever do.",
                                "You're not here to try and get into the Sith academy, are you? Most of the poor fools who try are killed by the Sith. It's horrible!",
                                "The Czerka cantina's the only place to go around here for any real fun.",
                                "Have you heard what happened to Taris? I can't believe the Sith are powerful enough to do that.",
                                "Whatever you do, don't try and land a ship outside of the colony. The Sith will destroy you without a second thought.",
                                "I can't wait to get back to the Core systems. This planet is dangerous with all those Sith wandering around."
                        ],
                        "Two Male Citizens": [
                                "I suppose you've heard? The heads of the Sith academy have disappeared. Something is going on, I'm sure of it.",
                                "There's some kind of power struggle going on at the Sith academy, I hear. Nothing unusual for those Sith, I guess.",
                                "I hear the Sith in the academy are fighting each other. Hope they don't blow it up around themselves, or the colony will go with them!",
                                "You look... familiar. Aren't you the one who won the swoop championship on Manaan? Too bad the circuit's dead or you could go pro.",
                                "It's not often I get a chance to meet such a fine swoop racer. You won on Manaan, right?",
                                "Aren't you the Manaan swoop champion? I figured you'd have gone to another sector by now, one with an actual circuit up and running.",
                                "Have you heard? The kolto on Manaan has been poisoned... completely ruined. That's terrible news with the war still underway.",
                                "I bet the Republic is responsible for the loss of the kolto on Manaan. Yes they...they just want to keep it out of the hands of the Sith, I'm sure of it.",
                                "The kolto reserves are all gone. That means the casualties in this war are going to become horrifying!",
                                "I heard something about the Wookiees on Edean suddenly revolting. Do you know anything about that?",
                                "One of my friends in Czerka said that they've been driven off Edean by those Wookiee creatures. Barbaric beasts!",
                                "Can you imagine? The Wookiee slaves on Edean have gone insane and started attacking the Czerka outpost there. It must be horrific!",
                                "The Sith blew up Taris, the entire planet. I guess they must have deserved it... but that's so many people...",
                                "I suppose you've heard about Taris being destroyed? The Republic must have pushed the Sith into it, that's what I think.",
                                "One of Korriban's primary trade routes went through Taris. Now that it's destroyed, the colony here will have an even harder time of it."
                        ]
                },
                "Two Male Citizens": ["Male Citizen 1", "Male Citizen 2"],
                "Czerka Guard": {
                        "Czerka Guards who killed wookiee": [
                                "Wow. This is going to look really bad on my record.",
                                "The patrol Captain will speak for us. He's the ranking officer in this unit.",
                                "You know, we're gonna get stuck with the bill for this.",
                                "I thought he said shoot. I swear he said shoot.",
                                "Well, this means extra duty for sure.",
                                "Why do they always have to be so difficult?",
                                "They won't miss one, will they?",
                                "We should just say it bolted, or something."
                        ],
                        "Czerka Guard (Dresdae)": [
                                "Go about your business, please, citizen.",
                                "This is a Sith colony. They are the law here. I am here only to protect Czerka interests.",
                                "You can conduct business at our office, if you wish.",
                                "Oh, entertainment can be found at the local cantina, provided by Czerka of course.",
                                "Please avoid the Sith academy... unless you are a hopeful, naturally."
                        ],
                        "Czerka Guard 1 (kill wookiee)": [
                                "This isn't good. I can't afford this.",
                                "Careful now... that growl sounded pretty threatening. Keep your slave on its leash",
                                "Uh, Captain, we have blasters. Don't Wookiees use those bowcaster things?",
                                "If... you say so, Captain.",
                                "Thanks for taking care of that, Captain."
                        ],
                        "Czerka Guard 2 (kill wookiee)": [
                                "You think I can? Do you know what they get for a healthy one of these things?",
                                "But I, I... if you say so, sir. I don't think we have enough... here.",
                                "Uh, Captain.... what's going on? Is this one of those inspector shake-downs?",
                                "Uh, are you all right, Captain?",
                                "That's right! We had to do it and it shouldn't come out of our pay."
                        ],
                        "Unidentified Czerka Guard": [
                                "Wookiees settle down a lot once they're caged.",
                                "You know, every Czerka outpost is expected to double the number of Wookiees they take in the next year.",
                                "Hey, we just got word that shipments will be increasing. This Chuundar really knows how to do business.",
                                "Hey, business is better than ever. These animals will pay our way for years.",
                                "I hear the Wookiees seem to be cooperating even more than usual now. Czerka can pretty much do whatever it wants.",
                                "I heard the Wookiee leader is saying we can increase the number of slaves we take. I think Czerka will be here a long time.",
                                "You know, I hear Czerka has negotiated to increase its presence here by six more outposts.",
                                "Hey! Don't get too close to the cages. Even these cowed Wookiees will take your arm off if they get the chance.",
                                "Don't bother me, now. I've got twice as many Wookiees to process as usual."
                        ],
                        "Czerka Guard (Great Walkway)": [
                                "Talk to the captain, not me.",
                                "I just carry a blaster. The captain does the talking.",
                                "I'm not paid to talk. Take it to the captain or the stiffs in the office.",
                                "Don't bother me. You're on your own here."
                        ]
                },
                "Czerka Guards who killed wookiee": [
                        "Czerka Guard 1 (kill wookiee)",
                        "Czerka Guard 2 (kill wookiee)"
                ],
                "Czerka Patrol Guard": [
                        "Czerka Patrol Guard 1",
                        "Czerka Patrol Guard 2",
                        "Czerka Patrol Guard 3"
                ],
                "Czerka Merchant": ["Czerka Merchant 1", "Czerka Merchant 2"],
                "Dark Jedi": {
                        "Dark Jedi (Anchorhead)": [
                                "Lord Malak was most displeased when he learned you had escaped Taris alive!"
                        ],
                        "Dark Jedi (Command Center)": [
                                "Bastila! You were a fool to betray the Master... and an even bigger fool",
                                "Revan is nothing! Malak earned the title of Dark Lord by defeating his old Master",
                                "You summoned us, Lord Malak?",
                                "Tell me what I must do, Master! Anything!",
                                "We will not fail you, Master!"
                        ],
                        "Dark Jedi (Deck 1)": ["Ah... more victims for us to slaughter."]
                },
                "Duel Spectator": {
                        "Female Generic Duel Spectator": [
                                "Hey - you're one of the duelists! The one they call the Mysterious Stranger - sure, I know you.",
                                "You beat Bendak Starkiller! I can't believe it... you actually beat him!",
                                "I hear you're going to fight Bendak Starkiller! This is great - I'm finally going to get to see a real death match!",
                                "I guess Twitch is next up for you, eh? Good luck - you'll need it!",
                                "I saw Bendak Starkiller sitting in the Pazaak room. I wish he'd come out of retirement.",
                                "I couldn't believe Duncan's last match. How could he lose to a raw rookie - no disrespect, of course. Duncan's so pathetic!",
                                "Hey, Stranger... I like watching you in the ring. It's enough to make a girl get all flushed.",
                                "I like your style, Stranger. You're the best thing the duel ring's seen since Bendak Starkiller retired!",
                                "Why doesn't Duncan just give the sport up? He's terrible.",
                                "I love watching Ice fight! She proves this isn't just a man's game!",
                                "Twitch is my favorite - he's wild!",
                                "I never saw a death match before. I thought it would be exciting, but it was actually kind of gross...",
                                "I hope the authorities don't hear about this death match - they'll shut it down if they find out!",
                                "None of these fighters would stand a chance against Bendak Starkiller!",
                                "Look - it's the Mysterious Stranger! You're just great! I watch all of your matches!",
                                "You're not so hot, Stranger. Everybody beats Duncan",
                                "Marl's been around forever. I wonder if he ever thinks about retiring?"
                        ],
                        "Male Generic Duel Spectator": [
                                "I recognize you - you're that new duelist everyone's talking about: the Mysterious Stranger.",
                                "I never thought anyone would ever beat Bendak. A hundred years from now people will still be talking about you!",
                                "Ha ha. I don't believe this - you're actually going to fight Bendak Starkiller in a death match! No way I'm going to miss this!",
                                "You gonna fight Twitch soon? I'd love to see that crazy psycho get what's coming to him!",
                                "I wish Bendak Starkiller would get back into the fight game. None of these duelists here can measure up to his legend!",
                                "Congratulations on your first win. Of course, you beat Duncan so it's nothing to get too excited about.",
                                "Hey, Stranger... I like watching you in the ring. Nothing's more exciting than a woman who isn't afraid to deal out the hurt. It's too bad I'm married...",
                                "You're good, Stranger. As good as I ever seen - with the exception of Bendak Starkiller, of course.",
                                "It's good to see Marl's still around after all these years. He proves this isn't just a young man's game.",
                                "I love watching Ice in the ring! Is there anything more exciting than a woman who's armed and dangerous?",
                                "Gerlon used to be one of the best in the game. Now he's barely better than old Deadeye Duncan.",
                                "Hey - it's the Mysterious Stranger! Great match against Bendak Starkiller - truly one for the ages.",
                                "Everybody's talking about the big death match between you and Bendak. I just hope the Sith don't decide to shut it down.",
                                "It's too bad Bendak Starkiller retired - I'd like to see you take him on.",
                                "So when are you going to take on Twitch? He's crazy, but he's fast. Damn fast. Still, I think you can beat him.",
                                "You'd think Duncan would want to retire after losing to a raw rookie, but old Deadeye is still at it. Gotta admire his persistence, I guess.",
                                "That Twitch is an animal! You couldn't pay me enough to get into the ring with him."
                        ]
                },
                "Duros": {
                        "Bith": [
                                "Thank you, human. I do not know what you are doing inside this military base,",
                                "Now I must leave this place before the Sith discover I have escaped."
                        ]
                },
                "Elder Rakata": {
                        "Elder Rakata Generic 1": [
                                "You have helped us at last! Finally we shall be able to reclaim our past!",
                                "You promised to help us last time, Revan. I hope that you live up to your word.",
                                "The work of our people must go on... to preserve our future.",
                                "The Council thinks you may help us... I hope that they are right.",
                                "The keeper of our history can help you if there is anything you wish to know.",
                                "I wish that we could fully trust you after your long absence, Revan... but I do not know if we can."
                        ],
                        "Elder Rakata Generic 2": [
                                "At last we can regain our place in the galaxy! Our thanks, Revan.",
                                "I hope that you find what you seek in the Temple, Revan, and that you help us as well.",
                                "If you wish to know more about us, speak to our keeper of history.",
                                "There are many unanswered questions about your last trip into the Temple, Revan... but those shall have to wait.",
                                "The other Rakata assaulted us mercilessly... but our defenses drove them back.",
                                "In time, I hope our tribe can unify our race once more."
                        ]
                },
                "Elder Rakatan": [
                        "Elder Rakatan 1",
                        "Elder Rakatan 2",
                        "Elder Rakatan 3",
                        "Elder Rakatan 4",
                        "Elder Rakatan 5"
                ],
                "Rakatan": [
                        "Rakatan 1",
                        "Rakatan 2",
                        "Rakatan 3",
                        "Rakatan 4",
                        "Rakatan 5"
                ],
                "Rakatan Warrior": {
                        "Rakatan Warrior 1": [
                                "When we return to our village, the One will reward you greatly.",
                                "Please, off-worlder! Release us!",
                                "The wrath of the Rakata will consume you all!"
                        ],
                        "Rakatan Warrior 2": [
                                "Thank you for saving me. I shall try to return to our camp.",
                                "Release us from these cages and we can escape!",
                                "If we survive, you will all know the wrath of the Rakata!"
                        ],
                        "Rakatan Warrior 3": [
                                "Get us out of here and you shall have the gratitude of the Rakata!",
                                "The One will not let the Elders live!",
                                "You have my thanks. I shall try to return to the One and tell him what has happened."
                        ]
                },
                "Jawa": {
                        "Jawa 1": [
                                "You are not the ghostly giants that hold us trapped, the People of Sand.",
                                "Iziz must have sent your coming. Are you a rescuer? You must be.",
                                "There are thanks you must have. The Jawas under Iziz will reward in trade.",
                                "Iziz will wait by the walls of your city that open to the sand.",
                                "We ask risk, but would trade for it. Iziz by the gates",
                                "We will answer if it leads to freedom.",
                                "I hear of this! Iziz would know! We scavenge",
                                "Now please to you of your kind, help us get away from the gaffi",
                                "Please return! The People of Sand lead with whip",
                                "The Jawas under Iziz know caution is best. Please",
                                "We thank you for this, if you mean to do it. It is",
                                "Eeeeee! We would not ask, and would not want to ask.",
                                "He that leads the ghosts will find you. Find us.",
                                "The city now founded by the group that digs, it is not new to you.",
                                "It will fall again, some days from now. Or many days.",
                                "Slaves to the People of Sand. We work before the whip. ",
                                "We trade with your kind, so we are weapons.",
                                "You are back to us. Your kind leaves more often than that.",
                                "Thanks will be yours. Reward will come in trade from Iziz."
                        ],
                        "Jawa 2 & 3": [
                                "We will thank you for helping.",
                                "We are slaves here to the People of Sand.",
                                "Your help will be fairly traded.",
                                "We under Iziz will thank you for helping."
                        ],
                        "Generic Jawa (Anchorhead)": [
                                "Trade is small now. You will all be gone soon.",
                                "Giants in the Sand will be here long after you. So will Jawa.",
                                "We trade and scavenge when people will buy. Not so good now.",
                                "Sand stays. All else changes.",
                                "We will remember you when you are sand too.",
                                "There are many of us, but not where you can see.",
                                "You come, you go, we scavenge, you come back, you go, we scavenge.",
                                "We scavenge for everyone, but Giants of Sand never trade fair."
                        ]
                },
                "Jawa 2 & 3": ["Jawa 2", "Jawa 3"],
                "Jawa Server": {
                        "Jawa Server (north)": [
                                "Strange. You are of your kind, but are unlike them too.",
                                "But taking of more was there as well.",
                                "You have the thanks of the Jawa under Iziz.",
                                "Why would you bother we of Jawa under Iziz?",
                                "The voices of Jawa under Iziz are not flawed.",
                                "Is this interest? Not",
                                "Jawas are tired of giant-speak.",
                                "Iziz stands at the walls that hold out the sand.",
                                "Your kind are like that, and Iziz is foolish",
                                "Back, but nothing changes, and ours are still lost."
                        ],
                        "Jawa Server (west)": [
                                "This job is not fair trade.",
                                "You were not here first, yet Jawas serve.",
                                "Better here than with People of Sand.",
                                "Jawas will dig the sand for you one day.",
                                "Move to the sides, out of serving way."
                        ]
                },
                "Hidden Bek": {
                        "Hidden Bek (Twi'lek female)": [
                                "The conquering hero returns! You did a great thing winning that swoop race for us!",
                                "Membership in the Beks is already starting to climb again. Won't be long now until we're back in control and Gadon can restore some order to the streets.",
                                "Used to be everyone wanted to join the Hidden Beks. But if the Vulkars win that swoop race I got a funny feeling a lot of our own people are going to join up with Brejik.",
                                "The Vulkars aren't the first group to try and take over from the Beks. Gadon knows how to deal with these upstarts. He may be blind, but he still can see the big picture.",
                                "The Vulkars are done for! Nobody will want to join them after seeing what Brejik did at the swoop race!",
                                "You heard what the Vulkars are putting up as a prize to the winner of the swoop race? A captured Republic soldier! Do you know how much she'd bring on the galactic slaver market?"
                        ],
                        "Hidden Bek (Orange Twi'lek male)": [
                                "I can't believe what Brejik did after the race - talk about no class! But what else could you expect from a Vulkar?",
                                "The Vulkars are gaining members every day from the smaller gangs. If they win the big swoop race there's no telling how many new recruits they'll get!",
                                "The Vulkars are out of control. Gang rivalry is one thing, but gunning people down in the streets is going too far! They don't even care if their victims are Beks or not!",
                                "The Vulkars won't last long against us now that Brejik's out of the way. Serves him right for trying to back out on his wager!",
                                "I don't deal in slaves, but that Republic soldier Brejik's offering as a prize would be worth a lot of credits to the right buyer."
                        ],
                        "Hidden Bek (Green Twi'lek male)": [
                                "Hey - I recognize you! You're the one who won the swoop race!",
                                "You better be careful out on the streets. Those damn Vulkars will be looking to get even with you for winning that race and killing Brejik.",
                                "Brejik is nothing but scum! I don't know why those Vulkars follow him - Gadon's ten times the man he is!",
                                "The swoop race coming up will show those Vulkars who's in charge here! When we win half the people following Brejik will desert him!",
                                "It isn't safe out there on the streets. Those Black Vulkars will take a shot at anybody!"
                        ],
                        "Hidden Bek (Aqualish)": [
                                "I can't believe that traitor Brejik used to be one of us. Gadon may be old and blind, but I'd rather follow him than a turncoat like Brejik!",
                                "We should have wiped the Vulkars out long ago, but Gadon Thek thought he could reason with Brejik and prevent a war. Guess we know better now.",
                                "If the Vulkar's hadn't stolen our swoop engine prototype we'd be a lock to win the big race this year!",
                                "With Brejik dead it won't be long until those Vulkars of his collapse. I bet within a week Gadon will have the Lower City back to normal."
                        ],
                        "Hidden Bek Guard (Rodian)": [
                                "Keep your eyes open. Our sources tell us Brejik's planning a hit on Gadon.",
                                "He's in his private chambers. He won't be",
                                "Assassin! Assassin in the base! Attack!",
                                "If you see anything suspicious, report it to one of the guards."
                        ],
                        "Unknown Hidden Bek": [
                                "You Sith don't scare me. Down here the swoop gang's are in charge ",
                                "You were racing for those damn Vulkars!",
                                "You better be careful out here. Those damn Vulkars",
                                "Brejik is nothing but a punk!",
                                "The swoop race coming up will show those Vulkars",
                                "You need to get inside - the Black Vulkars are gunning",
                                "You should get off the streets - those Black Vulkars "
                        ]
                },
                "Hidden Bek Guard": {
                        "Hidden Bek (Green Twi'lek male)": [
                                "Hey - I recognize you! You're the one who won the swoop race!",
                                "You better be careful out on the streets. Those damn Vulkars will be looking to get even with you for winning that race and killing Brejik.",
                                "Brejik is nothing but scum! I don't know why those Vulkars follow him - Gadon's ten times the man he is!",
                                "The swoop race coming up will show those Vulkars who's in charge here! When we win half the people following Brejik will desert him!",
                                "It isn't safe out there on the streets. Those Black Vulkars will take a shot at anybody!"
                        ],
                        "Hidden Bek Guard (Rodian)": [
                                "Keep your eyes open. Our sources tell us Brejik's"
                        ]
                },
                "Republic Soldier": {
                        "Republic Soldier (Manaan)": [
                                "Yeah, what do you...? Oh, I apologize Master Jedi, I should not have been rude.",
                                "No really, I should apologize. I should try to control myself... as you Jedi do.",
                                "Is there anything I can help you with?",
                                "These damn Sith are everywhere on Manaan, pushing us Republic citizens around, trying to goad us into breaking the law somewhere.",
                                "The Selkath want to maintain their neutrality in this war we're fighting with the Sith and they enforce it VERY strictly.",
                                "So we have to sit here and let the Sith insult us and we can't raise a hand against them otherwise the Republic will face severe kolto export restrictions.",
                                "You're joking... right?",
                                "Sorry, but everyone knows what kolto is. The most powerful healing agent in the galaxy. I would've died several times myself if we didn't have this stuff handy.",
                                "But the reason it's important here is that kolto is only found naturally on Manaan, and all of our attempts to synthesize it have failed miserably.",
                                "So we sit here on the surface, the Selkath harvesting what kolto bubbles up from the bottom of the ocean, and we buy it from them.",
                                "Us and the Sith of course. The Selkath don't want to play favorites.",
                                "The Selkath think that by staying neutral they can play both sides, selling kolto to everyone that needs it, and making themselves too valuable to be worth conquering.",
                                "Well, that, and they threatened to destroy the only natural source of kolto on the planet if anyone tries to attack them.",
                                "But I think they're underestimating the lengths the Sith will go to get what they want... They're probably planning something already.",
                                "Is there anything else you require?",
                                "A Star Map? Like an ancient artifact or something?",
                                "No, sorry, never heard of it.",
                                "Is there anything else I can do for you?",
                                "Well, for the kolto, of course. Really that's the only reason anyone would want to be here. It's the only reason the Selkath built Ahto City in the first place: to export kolto.",
                                "Um... It's big. Real big. Actually it's pretty much the only real city on the entire world.",
                                "Manaan is a water world - which you may have noticed on your way down to land here",
                                "They built this city to cater to us off-worlders and as a base of operations to export kolto",
                                "Of course. If you have any other questions you should probably see Roland Wann, he's the Republic diplomat here. He's by the Republic enclave near the visitor residences.",
                                "If you don't know where that is, go north from here, then south past the port official and the first courtyard, east into the second courtyard, then north then east again. You got that?",
                                "Have a pleasant stay, Master Jedi.",
                                "There's nothing we can do, though. The Selkath want to maintain their neutrality and they enforce it VERY strictly.",
                                "Peacefully? Not hardly. Just look in their eyes. You can see they'd like nothing more than to kill each and every one of us, personal-like.",
                                "You're... you're joking, right? The smug Hutt-spawn push us every chance they can get and enjoy it.",
                                "If you say so, Master Jedi. It's very aggravating. Sometimes I just want to take one of them and... (grrr)",
                                "Of course, I'm always willing to help a Jedi. What do you require?",
                                "If you have any other questions you should probably see Roland Wann, he's the Republic diplomat here. He's by the Republic enclave near the visitor residences. Have a pleasant stay, Master Jedi.",
                                "The senators work for the good of the whole galaxy, not for individual gain!",
                                "I'm warning you! Don't push me, or you'll get just what you're asking for!",
                                "(grrr)"
                        ],
                        "Confrontational Republic Soldier": [
                                "Save your empty threats, Sith scum!",
                                "You underestimate the Republic's resolve!",
                                "He wouldn't dare!"
                        ],
                        "Patrolling Republic Soldiers": [
                                "I can't stop to talk to tourists - I'm on kolto packing duty.",
                                "Hey - I'm working here! Go talk to the diplomatic",
                                "The Selkath have scaled back all kolto harvesting"
                        ],
                        "Republic Soldier (Wandering courtyard)": [
                                "Kolto production seems to have dropped off a LOT, recently.",
                                "The Sith Embassy has gone silent... and they aren't explaining. I hope it was something bad!",
                                "Good thing Sunry got free! The Sith who tried to pin the murder on him would probably have made him disappear in prison.",
                                "I can't believe those Selkath found Sunry guilty. The Sith must have bribed them or something... So much for neutrality!",
                                "Greetings, Master Jedi. I hope you have a pleasant stay here on Manaan."
                        ],
                        "Republic Soldier (west in trio)": [
                                "Those Sith are always trying to goad us. Why don't the Selkath stop them?"
                        ],
                        "Republic Soldier (south in trio)": [
                                "If it wasn't for those damn Selkath neutrality laws",
                                "I... I suppose you're right. You probably know best",
                                "As long as the Sith stay out of my way,",
                                "I can't do anything that would get me in trouble",
                                "We need the Selkath's kolto for the war effort against Malak."
                        ],
                        "Helmeted Republic Soldier 1": [
                                "Kolto sales seem to have dropped off considerably."
                        ],
                        "Republic Soldier (with Tyvark)": [
                                "How much for all this stuff, Tyvark?",
                                "Thanks, Tyvark. Catch you next week..",
                                "Hey, Tyvark - how's it going?",
                                "Ah, glad to hear it. This stuff's all for the Republic Embassy, so can you just bill it to them?",
                                "Hi, Tyvark. I've got to stock up - they might be sending me to the front to battle the Sith.",
                                "You and me both, Tyvark. You and me both.",
                                "The Selkath aren't harvesting kolto anymore. Something strange is going on... I bet the Sith are up to something!",
                                "The Selkath seem to be pretty cold to the Republic lately. It's almost like they blame us for the disappearance of the kolto.",
                                "I always shop here. Tyvark's prices are the best in the city.",
                                "Tyvark hates the Sith, so he's always giving us Republic soldiers discounts. I bet he gives you Jedi a great deal.",
                                "I have to get back to my post at the Republic Embassy. My break is almost over."
                        ],
                        "Republic Soldier (northeast in trio)": [
                                "I have to stop talking to Sith... they make me want to break"
                        ],
                        "Republic Soldier (working by boxes)": [
                                "I can't talk now. I have to get this kolto loaded up before my shift is over.",
                                "If you got a problem go talk to our diplomatic representative. Don't bother me with it.",
                                "People are saying the Republic did something to cripple the kolto production"
                        ]
                },
                "Patrolling Republic Soldiers": [
                        "Patrolling Republic Soldier 1",
                        "Patrolling Republic Soldier 2"
                ],
                "Selkath Apprentice": {
                        "Generic Selkath Apprentice": [
                                "Your death will bring glory to our new Sith Master!"
                        ],
                        "Selkath Apprentice with Dark Jedi Master": [
                                "Master, give us the honor of aiding you in destroying this enemy of the Sith."
                        ],
                        "Selkath Apprentice (Shasa Friend 1)": [
                                "The Master has promised to teach me great things.",
                                "We shall give you a chance to prove your claims",
                                "I don't know if we should believe them, Shasa.",
                                "We must report this to the Ahto City authorities!",
                                "Shasa - this is the Master's own datapad! Look - they are speaking the truth!"
                        ],
                        "Selkath Apprentice (Shasa Friend 2)": [
                                "There is much yet to learn of our new ways.",
                                "The Sith have treated us with respect and honor.",
                                "Intruders! Should we sound the alarm, Shasa?",
                                "Shasa, what if they speak the truth? Remember what happened at Taris...",
                                "Shasa - this is the pin I gave Galas when we were children.",
                                "Shasa - I believe them. How else would they have found this pin?",
                                "Shasa, I think the Sith are evil. I want to go home.",
                                "I told you your father would get suspicious, Shasa! He always hated the Sith!"
                        ],
                        "Selkath Apprentice (Shasa Friend 3)": [
                                "Greetings, fellow Sith. We may fight alongside one another one day.",
                                "If what you say about the Sith is true, prove it!",
                                "Perhaps this is a test the Sith have prepared for us?",
                                "Shasa, I think we should give them a chance to prove themselves.",
                                "We shall make our Masters proud by slaying you!"
                        ]
                },
                "Sith Trooper": {
                        "Patrolling Sith Trooper (Taris)": [
                                "Is there anything more boring than being out on patrol? Ah, I guess I shouldn't complain.",
                                "Some of the troops got stuck patrolling the Undercity sewers. That's one assignment I wouldn't want!",
                                "Out of our way, citizen - we're on official Sith business!"
                        ],
                        "Sith Trooper on Guard": [
                                "Just move along. There's nothing to see here.",
                                "A few of the Sith trooper uniforms have gone missing.",
                                "Uh-oh. I think the commander's losing his temper.",
                                "Then I guess we don't lose anything when the commander blows his head off",
                                "Just stay out of this, if you know what's good for you!",
                                "Smart move.",
                                "You're a little too curious for your own good, civilian!",
                                "Hey, we don't need any reinforcements.",
                                "What??? Traitors! Spies! Attack!",
                                "Good - get back to patrolling the streets.",
                                "What do you want, civilian? Do you have any information",
                                "You're awfully curious about this... maybe a little too curious!",
                                "A threat?! I knew you were a spy!",
                                "Right... like I'm going to believe that! A crate of Sith uniforms",
                                "You're part of some Tarisian underground resistance, aren't you?",
                                "Not so fast, civilian... why are you here?"
                        ],
                        "Sith Trooper by Cantina": [
                                "Hey, what do you think you're doing?",
                                "Then you shouldn't be in full uniform!",
                                "Good. Get back to your patrol route.",
                                "Don't bother me - I'm here on official Sith business!"
                        ]
                },
                "Slave": {
                        "Female Slaves": [
                                "Welcome to the slave quarters, fair mistress.",
                                "As you wish, master. You will find this most relaxing.",
                                "Welcome to the slave quarters, master. Here we have succulent fruits and berries to tempt your palette",
                                "Would you like a relaxing massage? Whatever your desire",
                                "Thank you, kind sir. I hope you will express your appreciation to Davik.",
                                "My, you certainly have a great hunger for my services. I will do my best to sate your prodigious appetites with another massage, master.",
                                "I am sorry I have failed to please you, master.",
                                "As... as you wish, master. It will not be the first time I have been punished by Davik.",
                                "I'm sorry, master, but the risk is too great.",
                                "I greet you once more, master. How may this humble servant be of use to you?",
                                "Please, I beg you - don't tell Davik you are displeased with me!"
                        ],
                        "Male Slave 1": [
                                "Welcome to the slave quarters, good sir. I mean no disrespect",
                                "Welcome to the slave quarters, mistress. Here we have succulent fruits and berries",
                                "Would you like a relaxing massage, mistress?",
                                "As you wish, mistress.",
                                "Thank you, my lady. I hope you will",
                                "My, you certainly have a great hunger for my services. I will do my best to sate your prodigious appetite with another massage, mistress.",
                                "I am sorry I have failed to please you, my lady.",
                                "As... as you wish, mistress.",
                                "I'm sorry, mistress, but the risk is too great. Davik will have me flayed alive",
                                "I greet you once more, mistress."
                        ]
                },
                "Female Slaves": ["Female Slave 1", "Female Slave 2"],
                "Female Slave 1": {
                        "Revan": [
                                "It wasn't as fulfilling as I hoped. Something seemed to be lacking."
                        ]
                },
                "Female Slave 2": {
                        "Revan": [
                                "It wasn't as fulfilling as I hoped. Something seemed to be lacking."
                        ]
                },
                "Bounty Hunter": {
                        "Rodian Bounty Hunter": [
                                "New face, new face... always new face here! On my world only the strong become trackers. Here everyone is bounty hunter!",
                                "You new here, take advice. Stay off my contracts!",
                                "Davik up to something. He bring famous bounty hunter Calo Nord in for a special assignment. Calo no work cheap."
                        ],
                        "Twi'lek Bounty Hunter 2": [
                                "Hey - you're the one who won that swoop race, right? Yeah, I saw the whole thing. And I thought my job was dangerous!",
                                "Zax is starting to get stingy... he hasn't added a new freelance contract to the board in nearly a week!",
                                "I heard Calo Nord is in town. Like there wasn't enough competition in this office already! Now we have the best bounty hunter in the system scooping our contracts!",
                                "Somebody killed Gadon Thek! He didn't even have a bounty on his head - talk about a waste of time!",
                                "Since the Sith got here the average price for each bounty has gone way up! Davik's had to raise his rates just to compete!"
                        ],
                        "Twi'lek Bounty Hunter 1": [
                                "I'll stick with the bounties Davik puts out... they're usually less dangerous than the government funded contracts.",
                                "I saw Calo Nord in the tap room. He's a legend in this business! I wonder if he'd give me an autograph?",
                                "These are good times for bounty hunters! I've made a small fortune on the bounties Zax has been paying out.",
                                "Did you hear? Somebody killed Gadon Thek! I bet it won't be long until the Beks put out a bounty on Brejik's head in retaliation!",
                                "Word is somebody stole the Vulkar's prototype swoop engine! I wonder if there's a reward to bring it back?",
                                "I saw you kill Bendak Starkiller! I was just about to bring him in, too!",
                                "See the price on Bendak Starkiller's head? Too bad no one will collect. Bendak never leaves the safety of that Upper City Cantina."
                        ]
                },
                "Captive": ["Captive 1", "Captive 2", "Captive 3", "Captive 4"],
                "Child": {
                        "Child (Upper City)": [
                                "You're one of them Sith, ain't you? My mommy says I'm not supposed to talk to you.",
                                "My Momma says I have to stay out of the Lower City. That's where bad people live."
                        ],
                        "Child (Southwest)": [
                                "You ain't supposed to be here! This ain't your home!",
                                "My Momma said I have to stay out of the Lower City. That's where bad people live."
                        ]
                },
                "Elder Researcher": {
                        "Elder Researcher 1": [
                                "With the new information we can gain from the Temple,",
                                "Only through our experiments and analysis can our people"
                        ],
                        "Elder Researcher 2": [
                                "When this new data we gain is assimilated, we shall gain unprecedented advances!",
                                "Our work is the most important one undertaken by our people."
                        ]
                },
                "Gate Guard": {
                        "Trewin": [
                                "A horrible fate for poor Hendar... I warned him not to leave the safety of the village.",
                                "But I couldn't open the gate... not while the rakghouls were so close. I had to protect the village.",
                                "But enough of this grim talk... we must focus on the positive if we are to survive down here. How can I help you, up-worlder?",
                                "I will open the gate for you, up-worlder, but you've got to be quick.",
                                "I am Trewin, from the Outcast village.",
                                "Heh. I just guard the gates. Gendar is the leader of the village, up-worlder.",
                                "Goodbye, up-worlder.",
                                "Thank you for saving Hendar. You are braver than I, up-worlder.",
                                "Perhaps we can learn a lesson from your brave actions.",
                                "You're not from the village. In fact, you look like you're from the up-world!",
                                "I don't know why you'd come down here to our village, but I guess I can let you in.",
                                "Hurry, up-worlder. I can only leave the gate open for a few seconds.",
                                "I can't open the gate... not while the rakghouls are so near.",
                                "You would risk your life for a stranger? You are brave... or foolish.",
                                "(Sigh) A horrible fate for poor Hendar. I warned him not to leave the safety of the village.",
                                "The gate is open. If you're going through you have to hurry, up-worlder, before I have to close it again.",
                                "Yes, up-worlder? Is there something you need?"
                        ]
                },
                "Guard": ["Guard 1", "Guard 2", "Guard 3", "Guard 4", "Guard 5"],
                "Miner": ["Miner 1", "Miner 2"],
                "Rakata": {
                        "Rakata Generic (two weapons)": [
                                "With the knowledge of the Red Rakata the One will lead us to dominance over all the other tribes of the world!",
                                "As a reward for slaying our hated enemy you may search our cache for whatever parts you need to repair your ship, Revan.",
                                "The One is studying the secrets of the Red Rakata. In time he will use them to unlock the knowledge trapped within the Temple of the Ancients!",
                                "The One has decreed that you may claim any piece you wish from the treasures we have collected from the ships that fell from the sky, Revan."
                        ],
                        "Rakata Generic (quarterstaff)": [
                                "The One is the greatest warrior in the long history of our tribe. He will lead us to victory over all our enemies!",
                                "We are the greatest of the Black Rakata. No leader is stronger than the One, and no other tribe commands the war beasts as we do.",
                                "The One is studying the secrets of the Red Rakata. In time he will use them to unlock the knowledge trapped within the Temple of the Ancients!",
                                "Once the Red Rakata are destroyed there will be none who dare to stand against our tribe!"
                        ],
                        "Rakata Generic Elite Warrior": [
                                "You have done us a great help by removing the Elders from our way. Now we can at last gain entrance to the Temple.",
                                "You betrayed us last time you were here, Revan. Do not let this happen again.",
                                "The One has said that we must let you aid yourself to what we may have so that you may overcome the Elders.",
                                "The loremaster will surely be interested in the stories you have gained since leaving us last, Revan."
                        ],
                        "Rakata Generic (double blade)": [
                                "With the secrets of the Temple in our grasp, we can at last complete our conquest of the world!",
                                "The Elders have held us up here long enough. Now, with your help, we can at last break this stalemate.",
                                "The war against the Elders will soon be over with you on our side.",
                                "When we have defeated the Elders, then at last can we leave this cursed island."
                        ]
                },
                "Taris Citizen": {
                        "Taris Citizen (Female Generic 1)": [
                                "They're saying someone broke into the military complex! I hear the Sith are thinking about enforcing a city wide curfew to tighten security.",
                                "It's a good thing a few of the Sith come in here to relax when they're off duty. That should keep them from closing this cantina down.",
                                "You aren't from Taris, are you? Do yourself a favor and stay away from the Tarisian ale - it packs more kick than most off-worlders can handle.",
                                "Hey - you're the Mysterious Stranger! I saw you gun down Starkiller in that death match! Guess you proved you don't have to be a man to handle a blaster.",
                                "I know you - you're the one who killed Bendak Starkiller in that death match! Too bad the quarantine has made Tarisian ale so expensive or I'd buy you a drink.",
                                "Have you heard? Bendak Starkiller's coming out of retirement! I almost feel bad for the blaster fodder who's going up against him.",
                                "Nice outfit. I've seen Outcasts in the Undercity who dress better than you."
                        ],
                        "Taris Citizen (Male Generic 1)": [
                                "Hey - I saw you win the big swoop race! Too bad Brejik had to get greedy and ruin everything!",
                                "The Lower City is nothing but a slum! If the Sith want to win us Tarisians over they should clean the gangs out of there!",
                                "Have you heard the reports? They're saying someone broke into the military compound! Oho! The Sith aren't going to like that.",
                                "You like Pazaak? I used to watch it all the time when Gelrood was playing here. He had some great matches against Niklos... until they banned him for cheating.",
                                "Have you gone into the music room in the back? Yeah, I don't care much for the band, but those dancing Twi'leks are something else, I'm telling you now!",
                                "Hey, I know you - you're the Mysterious Stranger! I saw you beat Bendak in the dueling ring! Ha! I lost a bundle betting against you!",
                                "Hey! You heard the latest rumor? Bendak Starkiller is coming out of retirement for one last illegal death match! Oohoo! I'm not missing this!",
                                "I heard the Sith sent a bunch of patrols into the Undercity. Probably want to loot the crash sites of those Republic escape pods that went down there."
                        ],
                        "Taris Citizen (Male Generic 2)": [
                                "Did you hear about the big fight at the swoop races? I wasn't there, but someone told me Brejik flipped out on the podium and wouldn't pay up!",
                                "Ah. There's too many people in this cantina since they added the music room at the back! I come here to relax, not to fight with crowds.",
                                "People are saying someone broke into the military base. Could mean trouble for us all if the Sith decide a Tarisian citizen was involved.",
                                "I'm surprised the Sith haven't done anything to try and bring in Davik. After all, everyone knows he's the crime lord who runs this planet.",
                                "The Sith are hunting for any Republic soldiers who escaped the battle overhead. They even sent a patrol into the Undercity to look for survivors!",
                                "You... you're the one who killed Bendak Starkiller, aren't you? What a match - best duel I ever saw! You know, you might want to lay low for a while.",
                                "Bendak Starkiller is coming out of retirement! Everyone's talking about it! Some spacer agreed to fight him in an illegal death match! I wonder how I can get a ticket?",
                                "Look at Niklos sitting over there with his Pazaak deck. I used to play, you know. But I wasn't very good."
                        ],
                        "Taris Citizen (Male Generic 3)": [
                                "Did you hear? There's an underground resistance movement against the Sith! They even broke into the military compound, or so I'm hearing.",
                                "It's bad enough the Sith conquered this planet, but do they have to come in here to relax and rub their presence in our faces?",
                                "Hey, that quarantine must be tough on you off-worlders stuck here. You should try to make the best of it and order yourself some Tarisian ale. It'll take away some of the sting.",
                                "Hey - you're the Mysterious Stranger! I saw you fight Bendak! There's nothing more exciting than a woman with a blaster, I say! Too bad my wife wouldn't agree...",
                                "Hey - you're the Mysterious Stranger! I saw you take out Bendak. Very harsh, man! You're one stone cold killer!",
                                "Have you heard? Bendak Starkiller's coming out of retirement! I have to get tickets for that match!",
                                "I wish the off duty Sith would stop coming in here for drinks. They've been scouring the Undercity looking for Republic escape pods and they reek of the sewers!"
                        ],
                        "Taris Citizen (Upper City Man)": [
                                "I'm not looking for any trouble with you Sith. Please, just leave me alone.",
                                "People complain about the Sith, but this quarantine is good for all the businesses on Taris. Look at Javyar's cantina. That place has never been busier!",
                                "If the Sith wanted to get on everyone's good side, they'd go clean up the swoop gangs in the Lower City.",
                                "What's this, another off-worlder? I didn't realize how many of you there were on Taris until this Sith quarantine.",
                                "I heard a bunch of wreckage from the battle overhead crashed into the Undercity."
                        ],
                        "Taris Citizen (Music Female)": [
                                "Did you hear what happened after the big swoop race? They say Brejik wouldn't pay up when he lost, and a brawl broke out! I can't believe I missed it!",
                                "Hmph - who dresses you? You look like you crawled up here from the Lower City. Oh well, I guess we can't all have style.",
                                "Isn't this band great? They can't leave Taris because of the Sith quarantine, so they've been playing here every night! Talk about a good break for us!",
                                "Hmph! I don't know what the guys in here find so attractive about those Twi'leks. Look at them - they're dressed like dirty little space wenches!",
                                "Did you hear? Bendak got dusted in that death match - by a woman, no less! Isn't that great? That should show these men a thing or two about who's the boss!",
                                "Did you hear the news? Bendak got dusted in that death match! I'll never get a chance to see something like that again. I can't believe I didn't get a ticket!",
                                "Have you heard? Someone's going to fight Bendak Starkiller in an illegal death match! I should go talk to that Hutt and try to get some tickets...",
                                "Everyone's worried the Sith will come in here and shut this place down."
                        ],
                        "Taris Citizen (street preacher)": [
                                "This crazy street preacher keeps on about war and days of reckoning",
                                "This guy's just stirring up trouble! Sure, there's a lot of aliens on Taris, but most of them stick to the Lower City.",
                                "I'm no alien-lover, but I don't want to see them all killed! This kook's way out of line.",
                                "You Sith should shut this guy up. I think he's violently dangerous."
                        ],
                        "Taris Citizen (Upper City South)": [
                                "What... what do you want? I'm not doing anything wrong. I'm just standing here... please, don't take me in for questioning!",
                                "Hey - didn't you just win the big swoop bike race in the Lower City? Yeah, it was you, I'm sure! That race was amazing!",
                                "Too bad Brejik wouldn't pay up on his wager! Oh well - he got what was coming to him.",
                                "I hear there's a gang war between the Hidden Beks and the Black Vulkars raging in the lower city.",
                                "I hear the crime lord Davik has a ship that can break through the Sith blockade.",
                                "Have you got your tickets for Bendak Starkiller's return to the duel ring? I hear it's going to be an illegal death match!",
                                "Check this out... we got a real live celebrity here. The Mysterious Stranger mixing with the common folk!",
                                "I lost a bundle betting against you, Stranger. Next time I'll know better.",
                                "That new mercenary working for Davik - I heard he's a Mandalorian! I wonder if he fought in the Mandalore Wars?"
                        ]
                }
        }
}


Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney – Trials and Tribulations


                        "Bikini": [
                                "Well, well, well... How nice to see you here. Welcome to our temple!",
                                "Oh my, my, my... Thank you for coming all this way",
                                "Ho ho ho. Well, we are high up in the mountains",
                                "Oh! Yes, yes! I almost forgot to introduce myself."],
                        "Grossberg": [" * Ah-HHHHEM! * "],
                        "Franziska": ["The prosecution... stands ready."]
                }


Chrono Trigger
                        "king guardia xxxiii": [
                                "That's enough, my dear!",
                                "All I asked was for you to behave like a princess. Even royalty must obey rules. Leave the rest up to the Chancellor and forget about the events in town.",
                                "We're leaving!",
                                "Silence, Princess Nadia! The throne comes before your personal wishes!",
                                "You pick up strange ideas venturing outside!",
                                "Princess Nadia!",
                                "Princess Nadia...",
                                "Oh! Nadia...",
                                "W, what do you want! I'm not giving in to your demands!",
                                "It's your fault for leaving the castle! And letting these...hoodlums in here. You might as well beg for bread on the street corner!",
                                "They're a disgrace to this family!",
                                "What...?",
                                "Get... OUT OF HERE this instant!!! I never want to see your face again!",
                                "We're no longer family! Do as you wish!!",
                                "W, what's that?",
                                "...... For me?",
                                "Let's see...",
                                "What...!!",
                                "How dare you...?! Giving me something this rich when you KNOW I have high cholesterol...!",
                                "This is the last straw! Now I know how you REALLY feel!",
                                "Leave! NOW!!!! Never show your face here again!!",
                                "What are you talking about?! We have no family heirlooms here!",
                                "Nadia! The Chancellor is trying to frame me!",
                                "Chancellor! What kind of trickery is this?!",
                                "Liar!! I've never even seen you before!",
                                "Nadia!",
                                "No, don't say it. I was wrong to be so stubborn.",
                                "I too, have that problem. I thought you left me, but realized that it was I, who abandoned you.",
                                "Your mother... How sad! It has taken me so long to understand what Aliza meant with her last words. «Someday when Nadia grows up, she will bring her beloved to meet you. Welcome him warmly. It will be a day you remember forever.»",
                                "Of course! You were so young! You ran around saying «Daddy, it's fun having all my favorite people here!» Seeing you so happy, she felt reassured, and she left us quite peacefully.",
                                "Yes, why?",
                                "You did.",
                                "I'll let you exit the castle, BUT! ...you be careful, now. Take care of her!",
                                "Sorry, fellas. I'm terribly embarrassed... Take care of Princess Nadia, OK? The real Chancellor's okay. He took off to the Knight's room sayin' he was gettin' ready for the parade!",
                                "We've been looking for you, Crono. Where did you take my daughter?",
                                "She says Crono has been a perfect gentleman, but...",
                                "What do you think, Chancellor?",
                                "Pierre, what do you think?",
                                "...save the future, right?",
                                "Here I was fussing about my kingdom, and my daughter, and you were saving past, present and future!",
                                "Now, for a true victory parade! Tonight we celebrate...you!",
                                "I'm so happy! Now there's no reason for you to go away anymore.",
                                "I have a gift for you, to commemorate this day, Princess Nadia.",
                                "This is Nadia's Bell. It will ring out across the land.",
                                "Marle...where did you go? Could someone please lend me a hand?",
                                "Uh, no Taban. Actually, I could really use your help... ",
                                "It's Nadia's Bell, which will replace the 400 year old Leene Bell. Henceforth, Nadia's Bell will proudly ring for lasting peace.",
                                "Now, you can do the honors.",
                                "Where have you been, Nadia? First, calm down. And why those clothes?",
                                "What ARE you babbling about? You needn't keep dressing that way!",
                                "You're just in time! We found this 400 year old wedding album in the treasury."
                        ],
                        "king guardia xxi": [
                                "Sir! I understand that you are the one who saved my dear wife, the Queen! But can you tell me what happened? Leene's acting rather odd. And she seems to have lost her coral pin, which is something she guarded with her life... Forgive me! You must be tired. We can talk about this later. Please rest in the Knights quarters, downstairs, to the left.",
                                "Thank you, Crono. But...who was that girl we found in the canyon?",
                                "Thank goodness, you're safe!! You may resemble Leene, but you sure don't act like her! Anyway, you've really helped me. Let me know how I can repay you.",
                                "Oh, Crono... I've let down my kingdom. Since we cannot locate Cyrus, our sole hope rests on the boy who has the hero medal... He searches the southern continent, for the sword that can defeat Magus.",
                                "Hello! You're always welcome here. What can I do for you?",
                                "I get it. You want me to keep that huge shell safe here until the next century, right?",
                                "Done! I shall obtain the shell and store it in the castle, as a national treasure. Knight Captain!",
                                "Go and obtain the Rainbow Shell, and bring it back in one piece!"
                        ],
                        "fake king guardia": [
                                "How nice of you to come. I'm sure Yakra will be just as pleased. Why not rest in here until he's available?"
                        ]
                },
                "soldier": {
                        "fake soldier": [
                                "A...are you here to save Queen Leene?! Oh, what a relief!"
                        ]
                },
                "queen": {
                        "marle": [
                                "Show your manners! This is a friend of mine!",
                                "You refuse to obey my orders?!",
                                "Giggle...",
                                "Stop that at once!",
                                "Ah! There you are.",
                                "Please leave us. I need to talk to this individual.",
                                "Come nearer, Sir.",
                                "Giggle...",
                                "Fooled you, didn't I, Crono?"
                        ],
                        "queen zeal": [
                                "Who are you!? How did you get in here?",
                                "How DARE you think you could oppose me, you...foreigners! You're worse than the Gurus!",
                                "Fools! Dalton, take them away!",
                                "Mwa, ha, ha... Fear not! You won't die...immediately, that is! But by the time we're through with you, you'll be begging us to end your suffering. What a delicious diversion!",
                                "Schala, raise the power of the Mammon Machine to its limit!",
                                "Schala! You dare to disobey me?!",
                                "Oh...what bright splendor! The incredible power of Lavos!!!",
                                "Ahh, I can feel it! The pulse of eternal life!!! Ha, ha, ha...!",
                                "Don't stop Schala! We're almost there... Immortality will be ours! Zeal will have the glory it deserves!",
                                "Mwa, ha, ha... Too long have I waited...!",
                                "What are you doing Schala?! I need your help here!",
                                "Th, the Mammon Machine!?",
                                "What do you think you can do?",
                                "Hmph! A false prophet... You'll be a snack for the great Lavos!",
                                "Get away from there, Schala! The almighty life force of Lavos lives in all of us... You are a part of it! You cannot change fate now! Oppose me and I will destroy you also!",
                                "Come Prophet, feel the power of Lavos!",
                                "Foolish one! Your measly power can't touch Lavos!",
                                "This is from me to you! You shall enjoy eternal life... ...as part of Lavos! Uwa, ha, ha, ha...!",
                                "So! You are Crono. Why don't you do as Schala says, and run away, yelping in terror? Isn't your life precious to you? Mwa, ha, ha!",
                                "Haven't given up yet? What do you hope to do? You challenge Lavos with that battered body of yours?",
                                "Mwa, ha, ha... See the power of Lavos and feel his wrath!",
                                "Behold, my pretties! Destiny, in its most brutal form. All the dreams that might have been. All the happiness, and sorrow, you might have experienced. Gone forever!!! For you there will be no tomorrow!",
                                "The Dark Omen transcends time and space, waiting for Lavos to awaken! Destiny has led you here. And here you shall rest forever, unless you can defeat me, and smash the Omen!",
                                "Come, dear friends. Perhaps I can persuade Lavos to share his dreams with you! Did I say dreams? I meant his eternal nightmare!",
                                "Argh! My powers don't seem to work here! Wait! I'll simply toss you into the Mammon Machine! You'll be one with the Omen, Lavos...and me!",
                                "So Melchior? You see, the Mammon Machine functions perfectly. Your worries were for naught.",
                                "The Guru of Reason, Belthasar.",
                                "And the Guru of Time, Gaspar...",
                                "Foolish ones, watch closely. Lavos awakens! The sun will never set on Zeal!"
                        ],
                        "queen leene": [
                                "You seem like one of the family, now!",
                                "Cyrus must have sent the boy to us."
                        ],
                        "fake queen leene": [
                                "There was no need for you to come rescue me! The master, Yakra is very kind! I've decided to stay here. Now why don't you make yourselves at home, too!"
                        ]
                },
                "queen leene": {
                        "marle": ["Stop that at once!"]
                },
                "king guardia": {
                        "king guardia xxi": [
                                "You had me worried, Leene.",
                                "Y...you're ALIVE! Although we did sustain major casualties, we wouldn't have made it without you! Anyway, we all must work together to rebuild the Kingdom of Guardia! We're all in this together!",
                                "Yes, he's real.",
                                "Do you have any children, Chancellor?",
                                "Then our victory is their freedom! Your children, and theirs as well, now live in a world that knows hope."
                        ],
                        "king guardia xxxiii": [
                                "It's you! Where's Princess Nadia? Tell her to return to the castle, please.",
                                "All right, forget it! Beat it, you guys!!",
                                "...... I've got nothing to say!",
                                "You fought Magus's troops, and brought peace to the kingdom in the year 600.",
                                "Our kinsmen told me all about your incredible mission.",
                                "Now Marle, go out and enjoy the last night of the fair!"
                        ]
                },
                "mayor": {
                        "truce mayor": [
                                "Want my advice?",
                                "You've got potential! You'll learn a number of «Techniques» as you progress! «Techniques» are magic attacks that also utilize your weapons. You'll acquire them with discipline. My, my! You're so enthusiastic! Use this to help you get started! A gift of 300 G!"
                        ],
                        "porre mayor": [
                                "Moon Stone? Never heard of it!",
                                "You're interested in the Moon Stone? Well, someone simply left it here. Seems important to you folks. Why don't you take it!",
                                "Share and share alike! Help the needy! Thinkin' about makin' THAT the town motto."
                        ],
                        "choras mayor": [
                                "There's an old structure to the north. It's been in ruins for ages.",
                                "A Hero's grave is to the north. 400 years ago, the knight Cyrus fell while protecting our Kingdom from Magus."
                        ]
                },
                "elder": {
                        "porre mayor": [
                                "Ha! I run this town! And I'm so rich I don't know what to do with it all!! Give you 10G if you act like a chicken!",
                                "Bo-oring!",
                                "HAAAHAHA! Here ya go, 10G!"
                        ],
                        "earthbound ones elder": [
                                "Miss Schala...why have you come to such a miserable place?",
                                "Schala's been abducted. But without sorcery, we can't do a thing.",
                                "Um! Your'e awake!",
                                "You were delirious.",
                                "We found no one else...",
                                "This island was the only refuge left, after the Ocean Palace disaster.",
                                "When the disaster struck, an eerie, black portal materialized. Melchior tried to save Janus, but he was also dragged in.",
                                "I don't know. No one has seen her since.",
                                "Your ship is quite sturdy and safe. It's almost as if it followed you here...",
                                "Oh, this must be yours.",
                                "Young lady, I found it on your shoulder, almost as if it were guarding you.",
                                "It was at your side, like a guardian...",
                                "Take all the time you need to rest. I will be in the commons.",
                                "All rested up?",
                                "Whoa! That ship can fly!",
                                "We're slowly recovering. We've got to start from scratch.",
                                "What happened?",
                                "Lavos is gone, so the Gate will shut. Return now, or you'll be lost in time.",
                                "Hey there!",
                                "They've all... Have they all left?",
                                "I forgot to give them this. ... ...Oh well.",
                                "They dropped this! ... ...Oh well..."
                        ],
                        "medina elder (blue imp)": [
                                "I'm the leader of Medina. Make yourself at home."
                        ]
                },
                "boss": {
                        "carpenter (600AD)": [
                                "My tools have been stolen! I can't get any work done now.",
                                "You've got some tools there. Will you lend them to a buddy?",
                                "Thanks for lending me those tools. Now I can finally get to work! I guess I'll start with the ruins! C'mon, you lazy blokes!",
                                "We're done for now.",
                                "We can't repair the spots where the monsters hide. Call us after you get rid of them. We'll do the rest.",
                                "You want the Northern Ruins repaired? It'll cost you 2000 G.",
                                "That's it for now."
                        ],
                        "carpenter (1000AD)": [
                                "You wanna borrow my tools? Be my guest! I'm busy here, so go get them from my wife.",
                                "Huh? When do I work? That's none of your business!"
                        ]
                },
                "owner": {
                        "choras inn owner": ["Come on in!"]
                },
                "innkeeper": {
                        "truce innkeeper": ["Seeya around."],
                        "porre innkeeper": [
                                "20G in advance...",
                                "Come again soon.",
                                "Very well!"
                        ],
                        "choras innkeeper": ["10G a night."]
                },
                "chief": {
                        "dorino elder": [
                                "We can use the «Rainbow Shell» to make some reflective armor. It'll be strong against magic! But that guy's a little flakey... Was it a mistake to trust him?",
                                "That liar! He's a no good, useless... He took the money but can't find what I asked for! I've been duped!"
                        ],
                        "laruba chief": [
                                "Thankful for Ioka. When village burn, they take us in."
                        ]
                },
                "chancellor": {
                        "chancellor/yakra": [
                                "Hmmm...",
                                "What do you want? Get out of my face!",
                                "She escaped?! But how? She was in a secured room!",
                                "Prepare yourself, Queen Leene.",
                                "YOU! How did you get in here?",
                                "Gyah, ha, ha... It's useless to fight! No one will leave here alive!",
                                "Stupid frog! It's time you jumped off this mortal coil!",
                                "True-form...CHANGE!"
                        ],
                        "real chancellor (600AD)": [
                                "That no good Yakra! Impersonating me and kidnapping the Queen! We MUST create a criminal justice system in this Kingdom to do away with such fiends.",
                                "Wow, you could be Leene's twin!",
                                "Sir Crono! The legendary Hero has finally appeared! He just arrived a moment ago, to meet the King.",
                                "Crono, my thanks extend for generations to come.",
                                "B, but your majesty, what victory? We have never fought anyone!",
                                "Y, yes, of course.",
                                "Ow, oww!"
                        ],
                        "real chancellor (1000AD)": [
                                "Phew, finally! That beast, keepin' me locked up in here...!",
                                "Princess Nadia! Your friends, I presume?",
                                "Wait, I don't have time for this. I must prepare for the Moonlight Parade!",
                                "Princess Nadia! At the moonlight parade, you shall receive a lovely present from me!",
                                "Enjoy yourselves at the moonlight parade!",
                                "Crono's deeds have had an enormous impact on the kingdom!"
                        ]
                },
                "woman" : {
        


DragonAge2
                        "Hawke": [
                                "I'm not letting you destroy your own life.",
                                "I know you're there. Show yourself!"
                        ],
                        "Flemeth": [
                                "She's a girl who thinks she knows what is what better than I, or anyone."
                        ]
                },
                "Pc Ots": {
                        "Petrice": [
                                "I should think you're about to have more. I am Sister Petrice."
                        ],
                        "Javaris": ["Horn-head oxmen and mongrel dog lords."]
                },
                "Player Ots": {
                        "Anders": ["Just tap the stone here..."],
                        "Orsino": ["You would cast us all as villains, but it is not so!"]
                },
                "Unknown": {
                        "Tobrius": ["Letter? Ah, word of the templar's death."],
                        "Ella": ["Aaah!"],
                        "Aveline": [
                                "Well-equipped for bandits, but dead is dead and the road is clear.",
                                "You fool. Why would you do this?",
                                "The Arishok may not like you, or anyone, but he seems to respect",
                                "Have you asked him? It would be Hawke's decision.",
                                "Remember Emeric? The templar?",
                                "He's in the Gallows. If it leads somewhere real"
                        ],
                        "Leandra": [
                                "Bethany, I beg you! Don't go! Don't do this!",
                                "(Cries)",
                                "I knew you would come."
                        ],
                        "Hawke": [
                                "He's your husband, Aveline. I can't decide his fate.",
                                "Sounds like you have a problem that needs fixing.",
                                "How can I kill my own sister?",
                                "Get out! Before I decide to show you just how laughable your threats really are.",
                                "Looked pretty real to me.",
                                "So much for not killing her.",
                                "Anders, that girl is a mage. We rescued her from being made Tranquil.",
                                "I'm not running straight into the horde. We go south.",
                                "Here, I got you something.",
                                "Was it that bad?",
                                "Your life before? What do you mean?",
                                "Oh, look who's here! Time to change the locks again.",
                                "I told you, I won't let that happen.",
                                "You must be the \"Exotic Wonder of the East.\"",
                                "You know what we face. The mages in there, they have risked everything. All of us!",
                                "Slow down. Tell me what happened here.",
                                "Goodbye, Bethany.",
                                "We should bring your sister the good news.",
                                "All yours, Sister.",
                                "We'll need to move quickly, then.",
                                "Let's see how you do when your target doesn't have their weapon bound.",
                                "You're on your own, pal.",
                                "Get to why I'm here.",
                                "Things are busy, Aveline. What's your point?",
                                "I let Bethany down. I promised her I'd look after Mother.",
                                "Gascard wishes to avenge his sister. He'd never give up.",
                                "If you join him, you die with him.",
                                "Mother!",
                                "You should be paying us, Uncle.",
                                "We have a home, Mother. A real home."
                        ],
                        "Bodahn Feddic": ["Not at all, but Sandal isn't really my son."],
                        "Bran": [
                                "At least, I hope their reaction is sadness.",
                                "The compound was not meant to be permanent."
                        ],
                        "Bethany": [
                                "Look after her, big brother.",
                                "You'll take care of it, won't you, Brother?",
                                "If the girl comes, she comes now, and you may not see her again.",
                                "Then... I guess this is it. Take care of Mother.",
                                "Whether we live to see it or not, a new day is coming, Sister.",
                                "Here I was, expecting to find my sister fighting this madwoman who would slaughter every mage in Kirkwall.",
                                "Andraste's grace!",
                                "What are we supposed to do now?"
                        ],
                        "Carver": [
                                "You'll do it, won't you, Brother?",
                                "All right, Sister. If the key works, we'll clear the estate from the Undercity up.",
                                "A man who let him look ahead, and a name that would always mean \"skill thoughtfully applied.\"",
                                "I expected to find my brother under attack from the templars..."
                        ],
                        "Stroud": ["I could say the same. Aren't you supposed to be dead?"],
                        "Rock Demon": ["Most unwise."],
                        "Cassandra": [
                                "Isn't it? Driven from their home, a sister taken against her will?",
                                "And the Champions’ companions? Merrill, Aveline, Isabela",
                                "The Champion was an apostate who came to Kirkwall to spread subversion",
                                "The Champion just happened to have dealings with the Qunari",
                                "You cannot sit there and tell me he is innocent!",
                                "He must have known! Somehow the Champion knew",
                                "The Champion could stop this madness before it's too late.",
                                "Bullshit. That's not what really happened!"
                        ],
                        "Fenris": [
                                "It never ends.",
                                "Vishante kaffas! (Spits)",
                                "Don't do this, Hawke. I need you.",
                                "An excellent idea.",
                                "I stayed nowhere for long. Who would I trust?",
                                "It would mean a lot to me. That's all I ask.",
                                "Fair enough, Hawke. I suppose I'll need to find out for myself."
                        ],
                        "Justice": [
                                "You have given into sloth. You would stand by while mages are abducted and tortured.",
                                "They will die! I will have every last templar for these abuses!",
                                "Every one of them will feel justice's burn.",
                                "She is theirs! I can feel their hold on her!",
                                "I will have my vengeance!"
                        ],
                        "Anders": [
                                "There is one more thing I would ask of you, Hawke.",
                                "Let go... of my friends!",
                                "Emile de Launcet wasn't dangerous! Have you even met the boy?",
                                "But I'm wasting my breath. Let's end this.",
                                "You were lucky to have her as long as you did.",
                                "I heard what happened."
                        ],
                        "Isabela": [
                                "It was fun, wasn't it? Well, you know",
                                "There you are.",
                                "(Grunts)",
                                "Come on. The exchange is happening tonight in a Lowtown foundry.",
                                "Fight me, you coward. You want to send me off with them",
                                "It took me a while to get back, what with all the fighting everywhere."
                        ],
                        "Varric": [
                                "Listen, Hawke... ",
                                "And maybe you should be sitting down for this.",
                                "Serving with the Red Iron is no mean feat",
                                "Are you hunting for an infamous apostate?",
                                "I suppose you think he planned the entire thing?",
                                "Help you? Bartrand, you left me to die!",
                                "Why'd you do it, Bartrand? Were you already crazy"
                        ],
                        "Karras": [
                                "Are you trying to tell me this boy is all that's left of the apostates?"
                        ],
                        "Grace": [
                                "I told Decimus he was going too far, but he said it was",
                                "No! The boy dies. Then the Champion."
                        ],
                        "Idunna": ["Oh, we like it rough, do we?"],
                        "Feynriel": ["What's happening? This is still the Fade!"],
                        "Emile De Launcet": [
                                "Oh, buggery! I know what this is about. I... I'm not a blood mage, all right?"
                        ],
                        "Keran": ["Aaah!", "No... Not her. I can't do this."],
                        "Templar 1": ["We know you're working for Meredith!"],
                        "Alain": [
                                "I... I'm sorry. Grace used blood magic to hold her.",
                                "This isn't right, Grace. Meredith's the one you should hate."
                        ],
                        "Meredith": [
                                "Champion. Welcome.",
                                "So it begins.",
                                "All of you, I want him dead!",
                                "You were never part of this Circle, and I tolerated that",
                                "Speak, if you have something to say.",
                                "You are Ser Carver's brother. Strange that he has never mentioned you.",
                                "Good. I'll overlook your own use of magic, for the moment.",
                                "I am in charge, and I refuse to play games. We attack.",
                                "Let's go. We need to find out what the Qunari are doing at the Keep."
                        ],
                        "Templar Lyl Ldr": [
                                "You're both destroying this city! You're making a mockery of everything we stand for!"
                        ],
                        "Cullen": ["Listen to the Champion."],
                        "Merrill": [
                                "This is my friend. He is my people, now.",
                                "Good. That will make this easier.",
                                "He wasn't! You of all people should understand the courage"
                        ],
                        "Keeper Marethari": [
                                "The demon hasn't been destroyed. Not yet. It's still here."
                        ],
                        "Athenril": ["Oh, but it's more than that."],
                        
                        "Magistrate Vanard": ["You know why I'm here, \"Champion.\""],
                        "Orsino": [
                                "There seem to be a great many Qunari at the Keep's entrance."
                        ],
                        "Arvaarad": [
                                "You, basra—your kind have no sense.",
                                "Saarebas! Nehraa aqun ebra kata Arvaarad!",
                                "Vashedan! Nehraa sataa karasaam!"
                        ],
                        
                        "Petrice": [
                                "Don't you spout your Qunari filth. This is a hand of the Divine.",
                                "To die untested would be the real crime."
                        ],
                        "Grand Cleric Elthina": [
                                "Serah Hawke, you stand with the captain of the guard?"
                        ],
                        "Viscount Dumar": [
                                "It does. And I am no longer that person.",
                                "Turned away, many times. No, this request was very specific."
                        ],
                        "Gamlen": [
                                "Magic's always run in this family. It's a curse.",
                                "I should talk to the city guard. Make arrangements"
                        ],
                        "Gascard": [
                                "H-Hawke? I... I should thank you for showing me what a monster Quentin was."
                        ]
                },
                "1 1": {
                        "Anders": ["If not now, when?"],
                        "Cricket": ["This is our home as much as it is hers."]
                },
                "1 2": {
                        "Fenris": ["To you, Hawke. A finer mage I have never met."],
                        "Meredith": [
                                "A refugee come to our city with an apostate sister",
                                "Not at all."
                        ],
                        "Hawke": ["Petrice!"]
                },
                "1 3": {
                        "Temmerin": [
                                "Hope you don't mind, Warden, but I set up the explosives here and there."
                        ],
                        "Dog": ["(Whines)"]
                },
                "2 1": {
                        "Merrill": [
                                "Two of my clan stumbled across it in a ruin.",
                                "Long ago, the elves had a kingdom. "
                        ],
                        "Gascard": ["So soon? I wasn't expecting this."]
                },
                "2 1 Alt2": "Leandra",
                "2 2": {
                        "Isabela": ["You're new around here, aren't you?"],
                        "Templar Lyl Ldr": ["You did this."],
                        "Magistrate Vanard": [
                                "You've gained quite a reputation with the Red Iron mercenary band."
                        ],
                        "Guardsman Maecon": ["Yes, stay out. Now if you'll excuse me."],
                        "Gascard": ["Quentin!"]
                },
                "Coolest Follower": {
                        "Bethany": [
                                "We are no templars, serah. You'll find no better friend to a young, scared mage."
                        ],
                        "Varric": [
                                "If I were you, I wouldn't be threatening the viscount's son.",
                                "Oh, I suppose you just got a tip from a slaver that he was selling mage-flesh cheap.",
                                "You never wondered if you were buying the viscount's well-known love child",
                                "You little shit..."
                        ],
                        "Anders": [
                                "Making friends as always, I see.",
                                "Perfect! If you come across any templars, or, ah, Grey Wardens who might want me back",
                                "When Vigil's Keep fell to the darkspawn, I left.",
                                "Let me guess: badly burned? In robes?",
                                "I'm special that way."
                        ],
                        "Aveline": [
                                "Think carefully. If you knew Quentin meant to take her, would you have told us?",
                                "Well?"
                        ],
                        "Fenris": ["That pain you feel is just the beginning, mage."],
                        "Merrill": ["Ooh, that's a pretty little shrine."]
                },
                "Guard": {
                        "Gallows Guard (Prologue)": [
                                "No admittance. Orders of the viscount.",
                                "Go back to Ferelden. Kirkwall isn't going to take you.",
                                "You're wasting your time; there's nothing here for you.",
                                "Just take your things and get back on the ship.",
                                "You should've thought of that before you came here.",
                                "Kirkwall has been sealed. You cannot enter."
                        ],
                        "Guardsman Maecon": [
                                "Guard-Captain! There's... I can't even describe...",
                                "Reports of some haze with the stench of rust and",
                                "Anyone caught in the cloud just went mad.",
                                "All of you, I can't fight the damned air!",
                                "Wait. Messere Hawke?",
                                "Maker, please, the street is death.",
                                "All I can do is warn people.",
                                "Shit.",
                                "But... shit.",
                                "You want to go in, that's your life.",
                                "Survivors are finally creeping out.",
                                "There's talk... about Qunari being responsible.",
                                "I don't give two shits if you're in or out!",
                                "What good does it do if I run in there?",
                                "I'm doing my job: keeping you from killing yourself.",
                                "I'm doing my job: keeping you from killing yourself."
                        ]
                },
                "Varric": {
                        "Varric (Removed Line)": [
                                "Justice is a funny concept.",
                                "It'll drive a man to perform the noblest deeds.",
                                "As well as the worst atrocities.",
                                "Justice is a blade that draws blood from the innocent and wicked alike.",
                                "And raised high, it can lead a charge that changes the world forever.",
                                "Reach down into your heart and",
                                "Survival. Honor. Glory.",
                                "But what about those who feel it's their duty to protect the innocent?",
                                "There you’ll find a warrior savage",
                                "And in the end they",
                                "Some men would fight anyone, kill anyone to gain their freedom.",
                                "But I know you can break your chains and yet remain a prisoner.",
                                "You can carry that darkness around inside you.",
                                "Until it burns itself into your flesh.",
                                "And changes you forever.",
                                "Sometimes people will surprise you.",
                                "They come to you in the form of a wink and a slow smile.",
                                "Pick your pocket and deceive you at every turn.",
                                "But when push comes to shove, they",
                                "And you can’t imagine anyone else you’d rather have there.",
                                "To the elves, loss is an old and familiar enemy.",
                                "Their homeland, their history, their very place in the world.",
                                "What would you do if you could get it all back?",
                                "Would you walk down a forbidden path?",
                                "Would you sacrifice your soul?",
                                "The man that tells the tale is the one who decides history.",
                                "He tells it wrong, and you have nothing more than a pretty story.",
                                "He tells it right—and you have a legacy.",
                                "You want a story told right, you ask someone who helped make it happen.",
                                "And if that someone is me—I’ll make it awesome.",
                                "So you want to know about the Champion?",
                                "Your rise to power begins March 8th.",
                                "Your rise to power begins March 11th.",
                                "He was a warrior without equal, a god among mortal men.",
                                "So if you really want to know how the legend began",
                                "He was quick as lightning and just as deadly",
                                "He was an archmage without peer,",
                                "She was a warrior without equal, a goddess among mortal men.",
                                "She was quick as lightning and just as deadly",
                                "She was an archmage without peer, a goddess among mortal men.",
                                "I thought everyone knew about the Champion of Kirkwall.",
                                "The Champion succeeded in reaching Kirkwall, the dreaded City of Chains.",
                                "The next year was spent just trying to survive, going from one adventure to the next.",
                                "Down we went into the Deep Roads, searching underground for an ancient treasure...",
                                "I thought the point was to learn about the Champion?",
                                "You wish me to skip ahead?",
                                "How about I skip to the reason you came here?",
                                "But you came here to ask about the rebellion.",
                                "You're right! All the other templars are so good at their jobs",
                                "Oh, I already told you about that, did I?",
                                "Gaps? I know it seems strange, but truth is often stranger than fiction.",
                                "Well that, my dear Seeker, is a different story completely.",
                                "I have to think! I can't remember everything at the drop of a hat, you know.",
                                "You know, now that I think about it, we really killed a lot of people.",
                                "Even were we all healers,",
                                "That's a nasty wound."
                        ]
                },
                "Cassandra": {
                        "Cassandra (Removed Line)": [
                                "But why was the Champion fighting the Qunari leader? Was this during the attack?",
                                "Not every single thing! How much longer is your tale?",
                                "No, I'm curious. Was the Champion rewarded?",
                                "Very well. Tell me what happened that night.",
                                "Varric, you make it sound like blood mages dance the Remigold",
                                "I meant gaps in time. What did the Champion do all those years after the Deep Roads",
                                "Why do you pause every time your story takes us through a door?",
                                "Just how many apostates were there in Kirkwall?",
                                "You seem to know a great deal about the Champion's private life.",
                                "Interesting. The stories I've heard don't mention that part."
                        ]
                },
                "Bran": {
                        "Bran (Removed Line)": [
                                "A templar Seeker in Kirkwall, and no official notification. Well, that is pleasant news."
                        ]
                },
                "Bethany": {
                        "Bethany (Removed Line)": [
                                "What do you think that Seeker wanted? I didn't get the feeling she was done here."
                        ]
                },
                "Grand Cleric Elthina": {
                        "Grand Cleric Elthina (Removed Line)": [
                                "Seeker Cassandra was impressed with your presence of mind."
                        ]
                },
                "Anders": {
                        "Anders (Removed Line)": [
                                "I don't like the idea of some templar Seeker tracking you. Be cautious.",
                                "Come now, high dragons are exceedingly rare",
                                "They never stood a chance.",
                                "Dragons. You never get used to the sight of them",
                                "So many injured... We'll never be able to get them all out in time.",
                                "He's dying. There is nothing I can do."
                        ]
                },
                "Cullen": {
                        "Cullen (Removed Line)": [
                                "We have a Seeker in town. She has not said what she hopes to uncover."
                        ]
                },
                "Hawke": {
                        "Hawke (Removed Line)": [
                                "You should be protecting the miners.",
                                "A high dragon? Are you sure?",
                                "Jansen, I need to get the miners to safety.",
                                "Jansen. I'm here to get you to safety.",
                                "Jansen, my friend. You look a bit worse for the wear.",
                                "Since they have sacrificed the most, the workers will own and run",
                                "The miners know how to run this place. I'll make you all co-owners.",
                                "I'm taking over the Bone Pit, effective now!",
                                "You and your fellows can have this blighted pit.",
                                "Was it your plan that the dragons would kill me?",
                                "Are you going to use blood magic on the people of Kirkwall?",
                                "Why Kirkwall? It doesn't exactly",
                                "Are you sure you want to do this?",
                                "If this elf never returned, how do you know the Wardens' cure worked?",
                                "I did all I could. Nothing to do now but wait.",
                                "Thank you, Merrill. I hope you're right.",
                                "Right now, I'm more concerned about telling my mother what happened.",
                                "Better not to dwell on it.",
                                "This isn't easy for me. I appreciate that you're trying to help.",
                                "The hardest part is still coming. I haven't given my mother the news yet."
                        ]
                },
                "Aveline": {
                        "Aveline (Removed Line)": [
                                "A high dragon? So near to Kirkwall?",
                                "Dragons! The legends of this place must be true.",
                                "So few survivors... and we'll lose more if we try to move them.",
                                "That wound has festered. It's... not good.",
                                "What is going on here? You men have your orders!",
                                "We have a greater responsibility. Do as you are commanded!",
                                "Wishful thinking. Stand your ground. The Circle will not fall today."
                        ]
                },
                "Fenris": {
                        "Fenris (Removed Line)": [
                                "Most dragons kill for food or territory.",
                                "Dragons. Further proof this place is cursed.",
                                "The wound rots. His death is certain."
                        ]
                },
                "Merrill": {
                        "Merrill (Removed Line)": [
                                "So many dead...",
                                "These people are beyond help.",
                                "So many injured and dying...",
                                "Will you take me now? To the city, I mean.",
                                "No, of course not!",
                                "I'm trying to help my people rediscover our history.",
                                "I would never hurt anyone! Not on purpose, anyway.",
                                "I confess, I've never been to a city.",
                                "I can't do what I have to do ",
                                "I... yes. Yes, I've made up my mind.",
                                "There's no going back to the Keeper now, anyway.",
                                "About your brother... oh, Hawke, I'm so sorry.",
                                "One of my clan got the corruption. Back in Ferelden.",
                                "The Wardens took him from us, and I never saw him again. But the cure worked.",
                                "You must have heard the story: A Dalish Grey Warden led an army against the Archdemon at Denerim.",
                                "My clan has heard nothing from him since then.",
                                "Not very encouraging, I suppose. Forget I mentioned it. Everything will be fine.",
                                "Carver is strong. If Anders could survive the Joining, I'm sure he will.",
                                "You'll see him again.",
                                "I wish there was more I could do.",
                                "If there's anything I can do, like... not talking anymore, I'll do it.",
                                "I'm certain that everything will turn out well.",
                                "Oh, she will be so upset! Not that it's your fault!",
                                "He died in the battle.",
                                "She became a great hero. She led an army against the Blight and won.",
                                "My clan hasn't heard from her since the battle.",
                                "She died fighting the Archdemon.",
                                "The Wardens took her away. She never returned to us, but... their cure worked.",
                                "I'm so sorry, Hawke.",
                                "Carver will be missed.",
                                "The blight sickness is terrible. At least he didn't suffer.",
                                "You did all you could for him.",
                                "I wish I could do more.",
                                "Elgar'nan! She will be devastated! Er... I'm not helping, am I? Shut up, Merrill."
                        ]
                },
                "Isabela": {
                        "Isabela (Removed Line)": ["This one's beyond help."]
                },
                "Jansen": {
                        "Jansen (Removed Line)": [
                                "I feel the cold creeping up. Not long till it stops my heart.",
                                "I overheard that bastard, talking to a guard"
                        ]
                },
                "Hubert": {
                        "Hubert (Removed Line)": [
                                "I, eh, convinced the city guard to... overlook what happened at the Bone Pit.",
                                "Robart reported dragons in the region, but they could have gone anywhere.",
                                "No! We can make a deal! How would you all like to be my partners?",
                                "I will go draw up the paperwork. Men, leave the corpses to the crows."
                        ]
                },
                "Merin": {
                        "Merin (Removed Line)": [
                                "Champion! Well-met. I never expected to find you here a second time.",
                                "I'm a Warden now. I couldn't sit by, knowing darkspawn still swarmed beneath our feet.",
                                "You saved me when my fool of a brother wanted to throw me to the darkspawn",
                                "I knew when I saw you fighting those darkspawn that this was what I had to dedicate",
                                "Of course. Thank you again for your aid, Champion.",
                                "I couldn't just sit by knowing monsters live down here.",
                                "I still can't believe the Grey Wardens accepted me.",
                                "People shouldn't assume that the end of the Blight means the end of darkspawn.",
                                "Without you, I would have died here three years ago. "
                        ]
                },
                "M": {
                        "Arishok": [
                                "Why do you bother me, human? I hire no blades and need no goods."
                        ],
                        "Hawke": ["You don't want to talk, we won't talk."]
                },
                "Mage": {
                        "Hawke": ["Allow me."]
                },
                "Templar 1": {
                        "Templar (talking to Macha)": [
                                "Keran, was it? No. There are many templars in Kirkwall, woman."
                        ]
                },
                "Master": {
                        "Meredith": ["Break it down."],
                        "Circle Mage (Last Straw)": ["Here they come!"],
                        "Circle Mage 2 (Last Straw)": ["Stop them!"],
                        "Sebastian": [
                                "Keep an open mind, Hawke. Elthina isn't behind this."
                        ],
                        "Aveline": [
                                "That woman in the portrait looks like Leandra, doesn't she?",
                                "Some days, Hawke..."
                        ],
                        "Anders": ["Hey, it's not like the templars are going"],
                        "Isabela": ["Sure. Why not?"],
                        "Varric": ["Chapter the last: pissing off everyone."],
                        "Fenris": ["Freedom was interesting while it lasted."],
                        "Merrill": ["And the day started so peacefully."]
DragonAge Origins
                        "Starrick the Apprentice": [
                                "This ought to be interesting.",
                                "Such diction. This man is a true scholar and rhetorician!",
                                "I am honored to be fired by one such as he! Good day!"
                        ],
                        "Sheth the Apprentice": [
                                "Strange. Let's see this.",
                                "I knew it! I gave that man the best seven weeks of my life!",
                                "Well, I guess he won't have me to push around anymore! Ha!"
                        ],
                        "Fayed the Apprentice": [
                                "What does it say?",
                                "Ugh. I knew this would happen. Just when I was starting to get good.",
                                "Well, thanks, I guess."
                        ],
                        "All Three Apprentices": [
                                "What can I do for you?",
                                "All right.",
                                "Yes? Make it quick.",
                                "What is it? I have work to do."
                        ]
                },
                "All Three Apprentices": [
                        "Starrick the Apprentice",
                        "Sheth the Apprentice",
                        "Fayed the Apprentice"
                ],
                "OWNER_lite_fite_widows": {
                        "Sara": ["I feared this day would come."],
                        "Tania": ["What?! This is terrible! My beloved!"],
                        "Larana": ["Why?! What did he do to deserve this?"],
                        "Irenia": ["No! I can't believe this. I won't!"],
                        "All Four Widows": [
                                "Good day.",
                                "Yes?",
                                "All right... let me take a look."
                        ]
                },
                "All Four Widows": ["Sara", "Tania", "Larana", "Irenia"],
                "Bodahn Feddic": {
                        "Danal": [
                                "You going to make more trouble? We've about all we can stand in Lothering now.",
                                "They had it coming, and they were trouble enough themselves.",
                                "Right, then. Name's Danal. Sorry I can't chat much... as you see",
                                "Well, those boys were trouble themselves, to tell the truth.",
                                "If keeping you drunk makes you calm and happy, drinks are on the house.",
                                "What can I get you, stranger?",
                                "Look around... people are sleeping on the floors and in the attic.",
                                "That monster killed three families, torn them up like a beast. The cage is too good for him",
                                "The sister? She came to Lothering a few years ago.",
                                "She's in here about once a week. Not to talk, though.",
                                "She is now. Who knows what she used to be.",
                                "When Teyrn Loghain marched by, he left those fellows behind to look for Grey Wardens.",
                                "I have no qualm with you, whatever the teyrn says.",
                                "What can I get you, then?",
                                "Luck speed your way.",
                                "Fair enough.",
                                "I heard a strange rumor the other day. King Cailan was not really Maric's son, you see.",
                                "I suppose they feed him cakes all day to keep him content.",
                                "I've heard a rumor that the reason Queen Anora has never produced an heir is that she's barren. ",
                                "Until someone of royal blood is put on the throne, there will never be an heir.",
                                "There's a nasty rumor going around that the Grey Wardens are evil and that they worship the archdemon.",
                                "They were getting upset, see, that there was no use for them anymore... so they summoned",
                                "Habren, daughter of the arl of South Reach, has spent an exorbitant amount of her father's coin buying puppies."
                        ],
                        "Bartender (Gnawed Noble Tavern)": [
                                "Anything else you need?",
                                "<desc>He glances around for prying eyes, then produces a few notes on behalf of \"interested parties\".</desc>",
                                "<desc>He nods discretely, and makes note of the recognition you are owed.</desc>",
                                "Right. I'll show you around."
                        ]
                },
                "Chanter Rosamund": {
                        "Chanter Farrah": [
                                "The deep dark before dawn's first light seems eternal. But know that the sun always rises."
                        ]
                },
                "OWNER_cli300_bodyguard": {
                        "Eamon's Bodyguard": [
                                "Good evening, my lady. It is an honor to meet you.",
                                "There was some groaning after the men received word",
                                "I think many are uneasy about facing the great horde.",
                                "Thank you. You can't imagine what a relief",
                                "We are concerned that darkspawn",
                                "No doubt you could defend yourself",
                                "I am not certain. On one hand",
                                "Do you... truly feel that we have a chance of winning?",
                                "Pardon?",
                                "I... I see. Well, I will hope for the best, then.",
                                "Of course, my lady. Good luck to you.",
                                "Of course, my lord. Good luck to you.",
                                "I hope you are right. I will pray for it.",
                                "I see. We can only hope for the best, then.",
                                "We are concerned that darkspawn assassins might be sent into the camp to harm you or the queen",
                                "I have done little else since I heard the news.",
                                "Of... of course, my lord. I apologize.",
                                "Of... of course, my lady. I apologize.",
                                "I... don't know. Certainly the Maker seems to favor you.",
                                "I have done little else since I heard the news.",
                                "I hope we are successful. I worry about my children.",
                                "Of course, my lady. My duty comes first.",
                                "Of course, my lord. My duty comes first.",
                                "Good evening, my lord. It is an honor to meet you."
                        ],
                        "Generic Bodyguard Lines": [
                                "It is an honor, Grey Warden.",
                                "You needn't worry about any problems tonight. We will guard you well.",
                                "Good evening, Grey Warden.",
                                "I am surprised to see you still up and about, Grey Warden.",
                                "Nervous about the battle tomorrow, I see?"
                        ]


Skyrim
                        "Mephala": [
                                "At last. I've been waiting for someone more fit to carry out my will.",
                                "Regrettably, I cannot reach your plane so directly.",
                                "The boy is good at sussing out secrets, but the corruptibility",
                                "I forgive your not knowing my name. Few can",
                                "You may think so. But in the end, you mortals",
                                "First, you must open this door. A piece of my power",
                                "Suit yourself. But those who listen at doors always"
                        ],
                        "Morokei": [
                                "Wo meyz wah dii vul junaar?",
                                "Nivahriin muz fent siiv nid aaz het.",
                                "Do you seek to finish that which you could not?",
                                "Come. Face your end."
                        ]
                },
                "Stormcloak 1": {
                        "Stormcloak 1 (with Galmar)": [
                                "What in the nine holds is that?",
                                "No. And I'm not sure I'm better off for it now neither.",
                                "Oh...I've heard of this. They say these walls show"
                        ],
                        "Stormcloak 1 (ambush Jagged Crown)": [
                                "You hear anything?",
                                "I don't like it.",
                                "Hardly likely."
                        ]
                },
                "Stormcloak 2": {
                        "Stormcloak 2 (with Galmar)": [
                                "Draugr. Ain't you ever seen one before?",
                                "Too bad we can't read these carvings. Who knows what secrets we'd uncover?"
                        ],
                        "Stormcloak 2 (ambush Jagged Crown)": [
                                "No, but I know they're out there.",
                                "Maybe they're so scared of you they ran away.",
                                "Just shut up and keep out of sight."
                        ],
                        "Stormcloak 2 (escaping with Hadvar)": [
                                "The Imperials have potions in here. We're going to need them."
                        ]
                },
                "Stormcloak Soldier": {
                        "Stormcloak 1 (with Galmar)": [
                                "But there isn't any other way through."
                        ],
                        "Stormcloak Soldier (escaping with Hadvar)": [
                                "We need to get moving! That dragon is tearing up the whole keep!"
                        ],
                        "Stormcloak Soldier (Ilfhild)": ["Hail, Galmar."],
                        "Stormcloak Soldier (facing execution)": [
                                "For the love of Talos, shut up and lets get this over with.",
                                "Come on, I haven't got all morning. My ancestors are smiling at me"
                        ],
                        "Stormcloak Soldier 2 (at execution)": ["Dragon!"],
                        "Stormcloak Soldier (Tower)": [
                                "We just need to move some of these rocks to clear the way!"
                        ],
                        "Stormcloak Soldier (blonde)": [
                                "No, I haven't seen him since the dragon showed up."
                        ]
                },
                "Stormcloak Soldier 2": {
                        "Stormcloak Soldier 2 (escaping with Hadvar)": [
                                "Just give me a minute...I'm out of breath..."
                        ],
                        "Stormcloak Soldier 2 (at execution)": ["You Imperial bastards!"]
                },
                "Stormcloak": {
                        "Stormcloak (escaping with Hadvar)": [
                                "What are you doing? We need to get out of Helgen now!"
                        ],
                        "Stormcloak Soldier (in the mist)": [
                                "Turn back, traveler! Terror awaits within this mist.",
                                "Near Giants' Gap, in the gloom before dawn",
                                "I do not know -- but none have passed through. Alduin",
                                "(skip to \"I saw it fair...\")",
                                "Don't you know? What drew you here? Surely your dreams showed you the way?",
                                "I'll try to hold to your hopeful purpose. Quickly, before this encompassing",
                                "Beware! The World-Eater waits within the mist!"
                        ],
                        "Stormcloak (with Gadar)": ["Look out! Draugr!"],
                        "Stormcloak (Fort Neugrad)": ["The guard has the key."],
                        "Stormcloak (questioning)": ["What about Jarl Elisif?"]
                },
                "Soldier": {
                        "Thalmor Soldier (torturing Etienne)": [
                                "Silence. You know the rules."
                        ],
                        "Thalmor Soldier (torturing Brelas)": ["Silence, prisoner!"],
                        "Thalmor Soldier (accusing Malborn)": [
                                "Listen up, spy. You're trapped in here",
                                "Silence, traitor! Move. Slowly."
                        ],
                        "Thalmor Soldier (Riften Ratway)": [
                                "There's the Blades agent! Kill him!"
                        ]
                },
                "Guard": {
                        "Whiterun Gate Guard": [
                                "Halt! City's closed with dragons about. Official business only.",
                                "Riverwood's in danger, too? You better go on in.",
                                "Fine, but we'll be keeping an eye on you.",
                                "Welcome to Whiterun, friend. Go right in.",
                                "Or else what? You think you can stand against the entire Whiterun city guard?",
                                "Safe travels."
                        ],
                        "Thalmor Guard": ["Yes, Madame Ambassador!"],
                        "Whiterun Guard": [
                                "Hear that?",
                                "Shor's bones, here he comes!",
                                "We may not be trying to kill him, but he sure seems to be trying to kill us!",
                                "I think it's holding!",
                                "You sure about that? You want to let that dragon loose after all the trouble to catch it there?",
                                "Your funeral. Someone else is going to have to help",
                                "Hey, when you make up your mind, let me know.",
                                "Get ready to open the trap! This seems like a really bad idea to me."
                        ],
                        "Falkreath Guard": [
                                "Did you see a Dog out there?",
                                "Ah, well.",
                                "No, this was a specific one.",
                                "I don't know really. The blacksmith is offering a reward for a dog he saw on the road."
                        ],
                        "Emperor's Guard": [
                                "By the gods! The Gourmet and the chef have poisoned the Emperor! Get them!"
                        ],
                        "Solitude Guard": [
                                "You did what? By the gods, you're serious. You'd better report this"
                        ]
                },
                "Vampire": {
                        "Vampire (with Lokil)": [
                                "Are you sure that was wise, Lokil? He still might have told us something",
                                "Yes, of course Lokil. Do not forget who brought"
                        ],
                        "Vampire (entrance Dimhollow)": [
                                "These Vigilants never know when to give up.",
                                "He fought well enough though.",
                                "All this talk is making me thirsty.",
                                "And I have half a mind to tell Lokil of your disloyalty."
                        ],
                        "Vampire Mistwalker": [
                                "The boss said it's some sort of profaned spring."
                        ]


Hades
                        "Asterius": [
                "Peaaaaace!"
            ],
            "Megaera": [
                "...the problem that I have with that wretched shade is his attitude.",
                "...I don't know which of them is worse, I swear to you.",
                "...He truly is an idiot, I'll give you that."
                    ]
                },
                "Scratch": {
            "Achilles": [
                "Good to see you, lad, despite the circumstances."
            ],
            "Storyteller": [
                    "Few tales are told of Hades,",
                "I, however, mean to tell you such a tale."
            ]
        },
        "Minotaur": "Asterius",
                "Intercom": "Hades"


Horizon Zero Dawn
                "COUNSELOR": {
                        "Female Counselor": [
                                "To be clear,",
                                "If you could try to remain calm",
                                "Medical!",
                                "... to discuss?",
                                "Pardon?",
                                "A... tobacco cigarette?",
                                "I believe Dr. Sobeck listed",
                                "Mr. Tate, I'm clearing you",
                                "... previously worked",
                                "Would you like to take a moment?"
                        ],
                        "Male Counselor": [""]
                },
                "Male Voice": {
                        "Male interviewer": ["Dr. Hsu-Vhey?"],
                        "Male Voice (Full Stop)": [
                                "I saw them lining up in the community room"
                        ]
                },


                "Contestant": {
                        "Female Contestant": [
                                "She was behind me!",
                                "Bast, with Vala right behind!",
                                "How'd she get up there?"
                        ],
                        "Male Contestant": [
                                "Who's in the lead? I can't see!",
                                "Hey - out there! The outcast!",
                                "Look! The outcast is catching up!"
                        ]
                },
                "Proctor": {
                        "Male Proctor": [
                                "Slow and steady now.",
                                "Looked strong, I thought",
                                "Ho now!"
                        ]
                },
                "Carja Artisan": {
                        "Male Carja Artisan 1": ["What happened?"],
                        "Male Carja Artisan 2": ["I haven't heard a blast like that"]
                },
                "Carja Villager": {
                        "Female Carja Villager 1": ["There's smoke rising"],
                        "Female Carja Villager 2": ["Are we under attack?"]
                },
                "Unknown Man": {
                        "Unknown Man 2": "Serve, and they live."
                },
                "Synthetic Voice": {
                        "Synthetic Voice (Zero Dawn)": [
                                "Welcome to Project: Zero Dawn.",
                                "Facility diagnostics detect multiple failures. Attempting repair.",
                                "Please take a seat and wait for your name to be called. A selection of beverages and snacks are available.",
                                "Please proceed into Viewing Room 1 for an important message regarding the purpose of your visit.",
                                "ZD_0_1 data intact. Initiating playback.",
                                "ZD_0_2 data intact. Initiating playback.",
                                "Alert. Medical wing inaccessible.",
                                "Alert. Area inaccessible. Elevators non-operational. Stairwells have collapsed.",
                                "Alert. H-Lock structural failure. Repeat: H-Lock structural failure.",
                                "Alert. Malfunction. APOLLO offline.",
                                "Master Override, armed. To activate, state name and rank.",
                                "Master Override, activated. Purging Extinction Protocol."
                        ]
                },
                "Multiservitor": {
                        "Multiservitor (Father)": [
                                "Children, let's run and jump and blow off steam!",
                                "After what just happened, I can't leave you two alone. You broke community rules.",
                                "I'm sorry, children. But I must provide supervision.",
                                "You sound frustrated. Let's run and jump and blow off steam!",
                                "Children, that area is not yet available."
                        ],
                
                                "Physical aggression detected! Physical aggression is not permitted!"
                        ],
                        "Multiservitor (Healer)": [
                                "Children may I be of assistance?",
                                "Lena, you have suffered mild bruising."
                        ]
                },
                "Oseram Guard": {
                        "Oseram Guard 1": [
                                "So who are these guys?",
                                "I don't know. They used to be Carja, and Carja are always yammering about sun and shade."
                        ],
                        "Oseram Guard 2": [
                                "What does that even mean?",
                                "Oh. Is that supposed to sound scary or something?",
                                "Well, if they used to be Carja, how tough can they be?"
                        ],
                        "Oseram Guard 3": [
                                "Yeah. Their best guys dress like birds. We'll rip their little feathers off."
                        ],
                        "Oseram Guards": ["Hit 'em like a hammer, 'til they can't hit back!"]
                },
                "Vanguard Regular": {
                        "Vanguard Regular 2": ["All of you - be ready to fire!"]
                },
                "Female Voice": {
                        "Female Voice (FAS)": [
                                "Welcome to Faro Automated Solutions, where all the problems of tomorrow"
                        ],
                
                        ]
                },
                "Oseram Guards": ["Oseram Guard 1", "Oseram Guard 2", "Oseram Guard 3"]
        }


The Secret of Monkey Island
                "Pirate": {
                        "Mancomb": [
                                "Ahoy there, stranger. New in town?",
                                "Guybrush Threepwood? Ha ha ha!!! That's the stupidest name I've ever heard!",
                                "But it's not even a name!",
                                "My name is Mancomb Seepgood."
                        ],
                        "Meathook": ["Hey! I don't like visitors!", "My name's Meathook"],
                        "Loom Pirate": [
                                "Aye!",
                                "Aye.",
                                "So, tell me about LOOM.",
                                "(Face brightens)",
                                "Sorry, but on some topics I just get carried away."
                        ]
                },
                "Man": {
                        "Stan": ["Howdy! I'm Stan of Stan's Previously"],
                        "Otis": [
                                "You gotta get me out of here!",
                                "Hey, it's hard to keep my breath",
                                "Ooooh! Grog-o-Mint! How refreshing!",
                                "My name is Otis."
                        ],
                        "Herman": ["Hi! I'm Herman Toothrot!"]
                }
        }
}


Persona3


                "Brunette": {
                        "Natsuki": [
                                "I-I never thought it'd turn out like this ... Fuuka ..."
                        ],
                        "Yukari": ["Who's he?", "... Is it okay for him to be here?"]
                },
                "Listener": {
                        "Male Listener": [
                                "It's becaues the building wasn't built that long ago, so everything's still gleaming. You know, I heard from my parents there was an explosion here 10 years ago. They replaced the building after that, but ... there's more to it, too. Around that time, a lot of students stopped coming to school. Maybe that's why they put up the new building ... to start with a clean slate ..."
                        ]
                },
                "Other Girl": {
                        "Gossip": [
                                "N-no! Not that one! I mean the story about the first-year student! Not only did she stop coming to school, she does nothing but sit and stare at the walls all day. If her mother tries to talk to her, she only mutters to herself, \"It's coming! It's coming!\"",
                                "You don't believe me ... ?"
                        ]
                },
                "Senior": {
                        "Senior (Front)": ["Huh? ... what're you doing?"]
                },
                "Student": {
                        "Female Student": [
                                "Yeah, I've had enough of this. I just wanna get accepted to college and start having some fun.",
                                "Next, we'll hear a word from the Student Council. Please welcome the new President, Mitsuru Kirijo, from Class 3-D.",
                                "If you're gonna flirt with each other, do it outside."
                        ],
                        "Nozomi": [
                                "... What difference does it make what I'm eating? You wouldn't understand the artful construction of this limited edition gourmet sandwich. Besides, after I'm done with this, there's a restaurant I must visit. Ahhh, I'm sooo busy ..."
                        ],
                        "Chihiro": [
                                "I say this as a member of Student Council ... that kind of behavior shouldn't be tolerated at school! Let's discuss this in our next meeting! If you're on my side, Minato-san, then I have nothing to fear!"
                        ],
                        "Male Listener": [
                                "Kirijo? The Student Council President? You know, the Kirijo Company built this school. I wonder how a company that big was contracted to build a school ...",
                                "She's going overseas after she graduates. Probably so she can run the Kirijo Company later ... she's so different from us ... the funny thing is, I hear she still lives in the dorms. I wonder why ... maybe her parents were strict when she was growing up."
                        ]
                },
                "Voice": {
                        "Fuuka": [
                                "... Are you human? Where am I? Why am I here? Please answer me ... Is someone there? Please answer ..."
                        ]
                },
                "Zealot": {
                        "Zealot 2": [
                                "My life's been going downhill, and I'm getting tired of it ... at my lowest point, I found out about Nyx-sama, and my heart came to life again. How about it? Will you let Nyx-sama into your heart, too?"
                        ]
                },
                "Man": {
                        "Tanaka": [
                                "There must be some handsome young man who will drive the housewives wild ...",
                                "(But he's just a high school student. If I trained him, though ... ) Hello there, young man. How would you like to have your dreams come true? I have a golden opportunity for you. I'm only saying this to you, so don't tell anyone, okay? I can make you rich - guarunteed.",
                                "I have some unfortunate news regarding your investment. Things are not running as smoothly as planned. It still has the potential to turn a profit, but ... I would require an additional 10,000 Yen to get things back on track. Are you willing to increase your investment by this amount?",
                                "I'll be in touch once your fortune has been made.",
                                "We ran into a bit of a snag again. Some of the other investors decided to drop out ... since there's fewer investors, each person's profits will be even bigger! Do you mind investing a bit more? Just 10,000 Yen more. That should be plenty!",
                                "Have you not yet realized that you are being decieved? Everything I've said has clearly been suspicious! ... Ignorance should be a crime. Sure, you have some positive qualities, but if you remain so naive, everyone will take advantage of you."
                        ],
                        "Maiko's Dad": [
                                "Oh please! This is what happens when you force a child to study non-stop!",
                                "She said she hung out with a high school kid instead of practicing piano.",
                                "Look, we're Maiko's parents, and basically we haven't seen her since this morning. We found a note in her room that said \"I'm running away. -Maiko\""
                        ]
                },
                "Boy": {
                        "Male Student": [
                                "C'mon, gimme a kiss! Please ...",
                                "You're the Treasurer, right? Why are you in that position if you don't know how to handle money properly? The teachers are in the office right now, so why don't you go fess up and apologize ...",
                                "... Whatever. Just make sure you take care of it.",
                                "Don't worry. I'll keep your little secret ... for now."
                        ],
                        "Pharos": [
                                "We've met before.",
                                "I remembered, so I thought I should tell you. The end of everything. ... But to be honest, I don't really know what it is. Oh, looks like you've awakened to your power ... and an unusual power it is. A power that takes many forms, yet is bound by none ... it may prove to be your salvation, depending on where you end up.",
                                "I'll be watching you, even if you forget about me ... okay then, see you later.",
                                "You will enocunter one of THEM. You must prepare for the ordeal, but time is of the essence ... I'm sure you're aware of that, of course. I'll come see you again when it's over. Goodbye for now.",
                                "I'm glad you remembered me.",
                                "I told you, remember? I'm always with you ... but we don't have much time to talk. Tonight there is more than one ordeal you must face. You should hurry ... she's waiting for you. You guys will need her. Okay, then. I hope we can speak again ...",
                                "It doesn't seem so certain, considering the vast potential within you. As a matter of fact, your seems to have changed quite a bit.",
                                "Oh, I see, I need a name ..."
                        ]
                },
                "Girl": {
                        "Female Student": [
                                "Hey, not so loud ...",
                                "You're so annoying ... okay, fine."
                        ],
                        "Maya": [
                                "oh wow, u haven't even finished generating your char yet ... o_O welcome to teh game! good thing i'm using my low level alt. i think its jus u an me, this is kind of a dead MMO these days xD",
                                "we r supposed to be our \"alternate selves\" rite? uhhh ... yeah. =/ sooo ... what r u gonna call ur char? we can meet up later. hm ... hey, i got a good name for u =3"
                        ],
                        "Nosy Girl": [
                                "Ekoda's in hot water",
                                "I don't know, but it must be serious. Sexual harassment, maybe?"
                        ],
                        "Listener": [
                                "Really? I guess some students transferred out ... but it sounds interesting. I'm tired of going straight home with no extracurriculars ..."
                        ],
                        "Aigis": ["I have found you. I have been searching for you."],
                        "Chidori": [
                                "Same here ...",
                                "Nothing. Why?",
                                "Why are you in such a panic ... ?"
                        ],
                        "Female Student 2": [
                                "You were the one who was responsible for that money, right? That means you were the last one who saw it ..."
                        ],
                        "Squinty-eyed Student": [
                                "I hear she has no father ... there's no way they could have any money, since her mom only works part-time. How could it NOT be her? She has such an innocent face, though ..."
                        ]


Persona4
                        "Unknown Female Voice 1": [
                                "I wish Junes would go under ... ",
                                "Oh my ...  How could she, with her family's business suffering like it is ... ?",
                                "What a troublesome child ... "
                        ],
                        "Unknown Female Voice 2": [
                                "It's all because of that store ... ",
                                "I heard their sales have gone downhill because of Junes."
                        ],
                        "Unknown Female Voice 3": [
                                "Oh, I heard that Konishi-san's daughter is working there.",
                                "That poor father ...  to have his own daughter working for the enemy."
                        ]
                },
                "Man": {
                        "Ailurophobe": [
                                "Arrrgh! D-Don't say the \"c-word\"!",
                                " ... Oh, d-did you hear that?",
                                "Ahahaha, well ...  I-It's okay, right!?",
                                "People have the right to think of their beloved!",
                                "(sigh) I'm getting married ... ",
                                "Dammit ...  Everything would be great if it wasn't for him ... ",
                                "Who am I talking about? That horrendous furball ... ",
                                "The c ... ",
                                "Argh! I'm scared! I can't even say it! Those fanged demons are terrifying!"
                        ],
                        "Akio's Dad": ["Akio, we're going home!"]
                },
                "Man's Voice": {
                        "Shady Reporter": [
                                "There you are.",
                                "No use in hiding, future manager of the cursed inn."
                        ],
                        "Yosuke Hanamura": ["Hey, Souji!"],
                        "Inoue": ["Excuse me ...  Souji-san, is it?"],
                        "Taro Namatame": [
                                "N-No ... ",
                                "That's not it ... ",
                                "I just wanted to live peacefully, that's it ... ",
                                " ...  ... ",
                                "I wish I could have lived here ... ",
                                "Together with ... ",
                                "I discovered the new world ... ",
                                "I must save people ... ",
                                "Yes, only I can ... ",
                                "Stop getting in my way!",
                                "I'm ... ",
                                "I'm going to save this girl!",
                                "No matter what ... ",
                                "This time ...  for sure ... "
                        ],
                        "Construction Crew": [
                                "Alright, outta the way! Out of the way I said!"
                        ],
                        "Male Patient": [
                                "Don't tell me to calm down! You're lying! We know you have medicine for this!",
                                "Are you just going to stand there and watch us die!?"
                        ]
                },
                "Middle-Aged Man": {
                        "Deputy Mayor": ["Well, if it isn't Rise-chan.", "Oh, Yuki-chan!"],
                        "Police Officer": [
                                "Aren't you Kanji Tatsumi? What are you doing here?"
                        ]
                },
                "Old Man": {
                        "Old Man (Fisherman)": [
                                "When I was younger, I used to spend more time haulin' fish in than I did sittin' with my hook in the water, but now ... ",
                                " ... You interested in fishin', boy?",
                                "Ho ho! I'll lend you some of my fishin' gear, then.",
                                "Let me tell you, fishin' is hard work. What you need is Diligence.",
                                "You can still fish without Diligence, o'course, but you'll get pretty darn tired of it quick.",
                                " ... Oh, well. Here's a Fishing Set. I'll give you ten of these here Baits, too.",
                                "Fishin' in the day is fun, but night fishin' ...  That's just stylish.",
                                "Do you want to hear some of my advice about fishin'? Hm?",
                                "First, you toss in the float. If there's a fish around, he'll take a poke at it.",
                                "If you rush it and pull your line up too fast, the fish'll get away. Well, you'll still have bait, so try again.",
                                "Listen, you want to start pulling right after the float sinks. When it bites, reel it in by pulling continuously!",
                                "If you don't keep pulling, it'll get away, and you'll lose your bait. Suck it up and pull as hard as you can!",
                                "If you lack Diligence, you'll probably want to go home after just one try. A tough guy like me can fish five times!",
                                "Oh, and your chances of landin' a real whopper are better on rainy days!",
                                "Do whatever you want with the fish you catch. If you don't particularly want 'em, I'll trade good stuff for 'em.",
                                "Good luck, boy.",
                                " ... You know what I'm talkin' about, right? Samegawa has a Guardian in the river.",
                                "I've only seen him once, when I was younger ... ",
                                "I felt a tug I'd never felt before, and when I pulled ... ",
                                "He was huge! Not only that, but there was this godly aura around him ... ",
                                "I fought him for hours, but I lost 'im. No ...  I know he was just toying with me.",
                                "I kept on fishin' for years and years, just hoping to catch a glimpse of him one more time, but ... ",
                                "I'm an old man, and the strength is gone from these arms ...  Maybe it's time to hang up my rod for good.",
                                " ... I just want to see him with my own two eyes one more time before I go to the big bait shop in the sky.",
                                "Then, I wouldn't have any regrets ... ",
                                "(sigh)",
                                "Are there any skilled young fishermen out there ... ?",
                                "That Huge Fish you got there ...  It's not bad ... ",
                                " ... Will you listen to my final wish?",
                                "Your skill, your eyes ...  I want to see you give it a try.",
                                "I want you to land the Guardian! You can do it!",
                                " ... Please! This old man's beggin' you!",
                                "I see ... ! I see, I see!",
                                "Alright, I'll give you this! My Angler's Set.",
                                "I carved this rod by hand, with all my fishin' spirit. If anything can catch the Guardian, it's this.",
                                " ... Oh, and try it on rainy days. It'll be harder for the fish to notice your presence when it's raining.",
                                "And, this is my ultimate fishin' advice! Listen close, because I ain't gonna repeat myself.",
                                "If you start pullin' when a fish pokes the bait, the fish'll run away, right?",
                                "So ...  if you don't want to catch that fish, pull the bait away before it bites!",
                                "You'll keep your bait, and the fish you don't want will swim away. Just keep repeating that ...  You get my drift?",
                                "I'm counting on you!",
                                "Ooooh!!",
                                "Th-Th-That ...  That must be!",
                                "(cough) (cough)",
                                "(pant) (pant)",
                                "(sigh) You scared me. I thought I was gonna die ... ",
                                "So, that thing you've got there must be the Guardian ... ",
                                "Congratulations, youngster!!",
                                "I ...  I don't have any more regrets ...  Now I can live out the rest of my life in peace ... ",
                                " ...  ... ",
                                "YEAH RIGHT! I'm gonna fish! You hear me!? I'm going to FISH!",
                                "Ya brat! Why don't we have a competition, eh!? Wahahaha!"
                        ],
                        "Keita's Grandpa": [
                                "Nobody lives at this here shrine.",
                                "I come by to tidy things up once in a while, but lately my legs are so achy, I just can't do it.",
                                "I've been tryin' to get this place up to snuff, but there just isn't enough money to go around.",
                                "Well, I s'pose I'll pay my respects.",
                                "If my legs don't heal, I can't maintain the shrine. That, and ... ",
                                " ... I won't be able to visit Keita anymore. He's my grandson, y'know.",
                                "Hmm!? What's that you got in your hand there? Could it be ... !?",
                                "That leaf ... ! That's it!",
                                "Way back when, my grandmother always used to say a leaf shaped like that was the best kind of ache remedy out there!",
                                "Ah, what memories!",
                                "But how'd you get your hands on this!? I didn't think you could find those in the mountains anymore.",
                                "P-Please, young man! Can I trouble you to spare me that leaf!?",
                                "Ooh, this is it, this is it ...  Now let's see here ... ",
                                "Oooh, I can feel it! It's working!",
                                "Amazing! The pain I've been feeling for who knows how long-it just up and vanished!",
                                "Hm ... ? Hrmmm ... !? Why, I feel better than I have in years!",
                                "You really helped me out, young man!",
                                "I'm so grateful! Now I can go visit my grandson!",
                                "I'd better pay thanks to the shrine for bringing us together like this!",
                                "Hm? What's a young man like you doing in an old place like this?",
                                "This place was bustling with visitors not too long ago, but these days, you see less and less.",
                                "I heard the town was considering tearing the place down because someone stole money from the offertory box.",
                                "Also heard some fox had taken up a home here and they were gonna haul it off to an animal shelter.",
                                "Too many rumors these days.",
                                "Remember that one about how the fog was making everyone sick?",
                                "Or that other one ...  What was it called? Midnight Radio ... ? That was popular with the kids, alright.",
                                "My grandson and his friends were all into it.",
                                "Funny, I remember something kinda like that happening when I was a kid, too. Wonder who starts these rumors ... ",
                                " ... Oops, I almost forgot. I was supposed to pick up some juice for my grandson."
                        ]
                },
                "Young Man": {
                        "Young Man with Shady Reporter": [
                                "That sounds like a great idea!",
                                "Th-This isn't sounding good, sir."
                        ]
                },
                "Young Man's Voice": {
                        "Punk": [
                                "Yeah, that's right. We all know it's time to cough up.",
                                "What? This's it? Quit bullshitting us."
                        ]
                },
                "Boy": {
                        "Akio": [
                                "Mister, do you have a girlfriend?",
                                "Let's play tag, Mister!",
                                "You're it!"
                        ],
                        "Yuuta": [" ... Whatever."],
                        "Lonely Boy": [
                                "I don't have any money.",
                                "You're not here for anything else, then, right?",
                                "I don't have any friends. So nobody ever wants to talk to me ... "
                        ]
                },
                "Boy's Voice": {
                        "Doll Boy": ["Hey, Mister!!"]
                },
                "Male Student": {
                        "Drama Club President": [
                                "Let's move on to tongue twisters.",
                                "Ready? The sixth chick cheek's shixth cheep ...  Argh!",
                                "Oh, a new guy?",
                                "You're Seta, from second year, right? The transfer student?",
                                "I see, I see. Welcome to the drama club!",
                                "I'm the club president, Nagai. And this is ... "
                        ],
                        "Male Student (Infirmary)": [
                                "Yeah, since Konishi isn't here.",
                                "Oh, come on guys!"
                        ]
                },
                "Girl's Friend": {
                        "Conniving Girl's Friend": [
                                "There's probably tons of places to hang out that only we'd know about.",
                                "What's with that attitude!? We're just trying to be friendly!",
                                "Uh, well, we'll be going now ... "
                        ]
                },
                "Woman's Voice": {
                        "Loudmouthed Woman": [
                                "Oh, Yosuke-kun. Just the man I was looking for."
                        ]
                },
                "Female Student": {
                        "Love Note Sender": [
                                "Oh, you're the transfer student, Souji ... ",
                                " ...  ... ",
                                "Souji ... ?",
                                "Oh, I must have made a mistake! This is your shoe box!",
                                " ...  ... "
                        ],
                        "Daisuke's Admirer": [
                                "Uh, um, hey, D-Daisuke-kun!",
                                "Practice is over, right? D-Do you wanna, um ... ?",
                                "Huh? Oh, uh ...  Would you mind if I waited for you? Am I in the way?",
                                "Hey, are you okay?",
                                "Um ...  maybe next time you're free-",
                                "S-Sorry. Was that my fault?",
                                "O-Okay. I'll, um, see you later then."
                        ],
                        "Female Student (Infirmary)": [
                                "Did you get hurt or something?",
                                "Thank goodness. We were running low on people.",
                                "We need to check around the school to see if anyone needs help, but someone has to stay and watch this room.",
                                "Souji-kun, would you mind staying here and dealing with anyone that stops by?",
                                " ... No touching the medicine, of course. If someone who's hurt shows up, use the first aid kit.",
                                "The only other things you'd have to worry about are salesmen and phone calls. They're pretty uncommon, though.",
                                "Oh, we should have Sensei call him back. Do you remember his name?",
                                "Oh, about the gauze, huh? What did he say?",
                                "Hmmmm ...  Got it. I'll call Sensei.",
                                "Alright, let's discuss what we found while we went around the school. Okay, group one ... ",
                                "Oh, that's right. You went alone.",
                                "Oh yeah, Konishi-kun ...  He can't help it, after what happened ... ",
                                "Yeah, poor thing. So you just have to do his part, too.",
                                "N-No, it's okay!",
                                "You don't have to come, really. Helping out at your parents' store is hard work, right?",
                                "We have a replacement, so don't worry.",
                                "Well ...  You can help Souji-kun clean up this room, then.",
                                "We'll go report to the teacher, so why don't you clean a little and go home, okay?",
                                "W-Well, goodbye!"
                        ],
                        "Awkward Girl": [
                                "Wh-What, don't just walk up to me and talk to me all of a sudden! Don't you know that's rude!?",
                                "Oh ... ",
                                "Umm ... ",
                                "S-Sorry for blowing up like that. It's fine. I'm not in a hurry to go anywhere or anything.",
                                "So ... "
                        ],
                        "Female Student in Store": [
                                "Eh? The incident last spring? I don't remember anything from that long ago!",
                                "I'm gonna be studying for college entrance exams next year, so I've got no room for useless information like that.",
                                "A suspicious person ... ?",
                                "Ah, now that you mention it, my friend was saying she saw someone ... ",
                                "I think she's just wandering around the shopping district, so why don't you ask her?"
                        ],
                        "Female Student in Street": [
                                "Uh ...  What are you talking about?",
                                "Did all that happen just last spring? Wow, it seems so long ago, haha.",
                                "Who's gonna remember something from that far back anyway?",
                                "A strange person?",
                                "Nah, I don't think I've seen any.",
                                "I mean, this is a pretty small town, wouldn't you say? If I had, I'm pretty sure I'd remember.",
                                "Uh ... ",
                                "Oh! That!",
                                "You remember Saki Konishi, don't you? You know, she passed away a while ago ... ",
                                "She told me how that Namatame person came to her one day and started spouting all this craziness.",
                                "Something about the TV ...  I wonder what that was all about.",
                                "His relation to Saki?",
                                "Hey, I don't know what you're implying, but you've got it all wrong!",
                                "Saki was a good girl! It's just that people misunderstood her!"
                        ],
                        "Girl's Voice 1": [
                                "Hey, did you hear? The fog made someone faint ... ",
                                "I'd worry more about getting a gas mask! If you won't, you could be next!"
                        ],
                        "Girl's Voice 2": [
                                "Oh yeah. I heard it was someone from 3-3 ... ",
                                "But we don't know what really caused it, right? No point in panicking."
                        ]
                },
                "Familiar Voice": {
                        "Takeshi": ["S-Stop it ... !"],
                        "Igor": [
                                "(chuckle)",
                                "You're a confident one ... ",
                                "Overestimating your competence will only work against you, miss ... ",
                                "(chuckle) If that's the case, I most certainly have the advantage."
                        ]


Persona 5
Its a lot




Mass Effect 
                        "Mira": [
                                "Now arriving at Rift Station, Binary Helix research facility.",
                                "Departing Rift Station. Destination: Central Station.",
                                "Critical startup error. Virtual Intelligence user interface offline. Manual boot required.",
                                "Now arriving at Peak 15 Central Station.",
                                "Departing Central Station. Destination: Rift Station."
                        ],
                        "Salarian Log (Peak 15)": [
                                "...control grou-- ...loose in the... they're... can't escape... up the tunnels now. We're sorry. The leads couldn't get to... --struct. ..out while you can..."
                        ],
                        "Follower on Intercom": [
                                "This is a private sanctuary. Outsiders are not welcome here.",
                                "Father Kyle wants nothing more to do with the Alliance.",
                                "Wait...",
                                "We won't let you take Father Kyle away! He protects us. We need him!",
                                "Father Kyle told us that the Alliance wouldn't let us live in peace. This is your last warning. Go away, or we will defend ourselves!",
                                "Father Kyle wants nothing more to do with the Alliance.",
                                "This is a private sanctuary. Outsiders are not welcome.",
                                "The compound is under attack!",
                                "Father Kyle will speak with you. Head to the building at the far end of the compound. He'll meet you there."
                        ],
                        "ANCHOR": [
                                ""
                        ]
                },
                "ice_ercs_guard1": {
                        "ERCS Guard 1 (Rift Station)": [
                                "I didn't know Alliance basic training included biochemistry.",
                                "Been counting your kills? I'm up to twenty-four.",
                                "Krogan. Hanar. These things. Doesn't matter what color they are, or how many legs they have. They're all out to screw us.",
                                "I just shoot things. You want a sitrep, you talk to Cap'n Ventralis.",
                                "The science crew look about to wet themselves.",
                                "Got a smoke? We're all out.",
                                "Welcome to hell. Smoking or non-smoking?"
                        ],
                        "ERCS Garage Guard": [
                                "Go on through, Commander.",
                                "Access to the garage is restricted.",
                                "Yes, that's genuine. Drive safely. The weather's supposed to be pretty bad out in the Aleutsk Valley.",
                                "If you want to enter the garage, you need authorization from Mr. Anoleis. No exceptions. Sorry.",
                                "Have a good day."
                        ],


                        "Juliana Baynham": [
                                "... anybody. Is there anyone picking this up?"
                        ],


                                "This place seems strange. I wish there were more humans around.",
                                "You have to be tough with these aliens. They won't respect you otherwise.",
                                "It's good to see another human face around here.",
                                "If I have to listen to another hanar take twenty minutes to say the simplest thing, I think I'll scream."
                        ],
                        "Alliance Tower": [
                                "Normandy, this is Alliance Tower. Please proceed to dock 422."
                        ]
                },
                "Citadel News": {
                        "Port Hanshan Greeting": [
                                "Welcome to Port Hanshan, the galaxy's most respected site for independent scientific research and development.",
                                "For your own safety, and to protect the privacy of others, you are required to obey any directions given by our security personnel.",
                                "If you have questions or concerns, our friendly administrative staff is always available. Thank you, and enjoy your stay."
                        ]
                },


Mass Effect 2
                        "Quarian Researcher": [
                                "Who's running this system diagnostic? I didn't authorize... oh, Keelah. How many geth are networked?",
                                "Shut it down! Shut everything down! They're in the system!",
                                "We locked down navigation. Weapons are offline. Our mistake won't endanger the Fleet.",
                                "They're burning through the door. I don't have much time. I'm sorry. I'm so sorry.",
                                "Jona, if you get this, be strong for Daddy. Mommy loves you very much!",
                                "First entry: Our hacking attempts failed. The geth have an adaptive consciousness. Hack one process, and the others auto-correct.",
                                "Still, we're making progress. Rael'Zorah is convinced we'll have a viable system in less than a year.",
                                "This weapon will put our people back on the homeworld. And it's all because of Rael'Zorah."
                        ],
                        "Quarian Scientist": [
                                "Something's slowing down the systems. We're taking down the firewalls to rebalance load distribution.",
                                "Rael'Zorah ordered us to bypass standard safeties. Following security protocols will take too long."
                        ]
                },
                "twrhub_asarifriend": {
                        "Doubtful Asari": [
                                "I don't know. Some of them seem dangerous.",
                                "That's horrible!",
                                "You can sell something that dangerous with just a contract and a waiver?",
                                "I don't know. That still sounds like an awful thing to legalize.",
                                "Who reads labels, though?",
                                "Sometimes you say these things, and... I don't know. Maybe it's because you had a batarian father.",
                                "The word you're looking for is pureblood.",
                                "No. But you're thinking about it.",
                                "You think it was easy growing up pureblood? I did some stupid things to get away from the taunts.",
                                "The stupid drug users you're laughing at? I might have been one of them.",
                                "Forget it. Do whatever you want."
                        ],
                        "Pragmatic Asari": [
                                "Trust me. The goods coming in from the Terminus Systems are great for business.",
                                "That's the whole point. Danger means more contract work for us.",
                                "For example, you know that new drug, the one that causes permanent neural scarring?",
                                "There's a 12 page contract for shipping, then a waiver for use.",
                                "I charged for 50 hours, plus overtime.",
                                "These are the Terminus Systems. Everything's dangerous. And everything's for sale.",
                                "Either we tax and monitor it to keep some control, or the smugglers get a monopoly.",
                                "All the dangers are right there on the package. It's legally required.",
                                "So consider it a way to weed out the people too stupid to know their limits.",
                                "Wow. You're pulling that on me? My father was an excellent caretaker!",
                                "And you're... you're...",
                                "Hey! We're friends. I have never called you that.",
                                "I didn't mean... Okay, look, I'll take another look at the contract.",
                                "Maybe it needs to be reclassified."
                        ]


Mass Effect 3
                        "Marine (Hammer Base)": [
                                "Admiral, we've set up a command center in the building over there.",
                                "Yes, sir, but not as many as we'd hoped.",
                                "Hooyah.",
                                "Oorah. Yes, sir!"
                        ],
                        "Female Marine (Purgatory)": ["True enough. Cheers."],


                        ]
                },


                                "Be advised: Recon units Echo Bravo and Echo Charlie have checked in.",
                                "Reports indicate once you're past the base, it's a no-man's-land. Enemy interdiction has been 100 percent.",
                                "They said one of the big Reapers swept through the area.",
                                "Affirmative: advise delaying next wave of Hammer.",
                                "Acknowledged.",
                                "Enfield reports 80 percent KIA. Camden: 75 percent KIA. Redbridge: 92 percent KIA. Kensington: 100 percent KIA.",
                                "Say again: Kensington reports 100 percent killed in action.",
                                "A burst-transmission SOS reported they were being overrun by enemy forces. No word since. All personnel presumed dead.",
                                "Will advise as more intel becomes available.",
                                "Harrow's field-command reports increased Reaper activity on the northeastern perimeter.",
                                "Harrow's field-command has been advised. Air control is transferring now.",
                                "Advise turians that frequency encryption Constant Viper should be maintained on all channels.",
                                "We have confirmation from Sutton logistics that food supplies are running low.",
                                "This is a London theater-wide update: Be advised that Kensington outpost remains dark. Contact has been lost. No change in status.",
                                "This is a flash-traffic alert, priority one: Redbridge platoon Delta Kilo requests immediate evac alert.",
                                "Copy that alert. Is there an ETA?",
                                "Advise Delta Kilo they're ten minutes out and counting.",
                                "Copy that."
                        ],
                        "Earth Comm Officer 2": [
                                "Acknowledged. Turian support is being rerouted via approach vector Nine-Three-Niner. Confirm.",
                                "Advise Sutton logistics that all overland routes to their position are blocked by enemy forces. Negative on a resupply.",
                                "Copy that request. Nearest available unit is out of Havering mobile. Issuing a priority one scramble alert now."
                        ]
                },
                "Turian Commander": {
                        "Reception (Sanctuary)": [
                                "Incident Report #2139: An illegal communication device nearly made it past pre-screening.",
                                "Scanner software has been adjusted.",
                                "No way it could penetrate the central scrambler, but we can't chance a signal leaving the planet.",
                                "Report filed."
                        ]
                },
                "Lieutenant Kurin": {
                        "Asari Commando (Hammer)": [
                                "All units, open fire!",
                                "Where's our fire support? We need reinforcements on the--"
                        ]
                },
                "citprs_csec_guard01": {
                        "C-Sec Security Guard 1": [
                                "Visitors are prohibited from bringing weapons into the--",
                                "(Grunts)"
                        ],
                        "Reception 2 (Sanctuary)": [
                                "I figure in another week, I can finish off the remaining hours on my contract and move from staff housing into Sanctuary itself.",
                                "I feel a little guilty that I'm getting an upgrade from standard accommodations. But, that's the deal.",
                                "Do your time at the front desk--get the perks.",
                                "One more week."
                        ]
                },
                "Commander Bailey": "Armando-Owen Bailey"
        }


Kingdom Hearts
        Donald, Sorry to rush off without sayin' goodbye, but there's big trouble brewin'"]},
                


                        "Sora": [
                                "I've been having these weird thoughts lately... Like, is any of this for real or not?",
                                "Yes.",
                                "I can't open it...",
                                "Friendship.",
                                "To be strong.",
                                "Being indecisive.",
                                "Sounds good.",
                                "Whoa!",
                                "Gimme a break, Kairi."
                        ],
                        "Leon":[
                                "Sora. You did it."
                        ],
                        "Riku": [
                                "Hey!"
                        ],
                        "Captain Hook": [
                                "And the brat's friends are the king's lackeys. Swoggle me eyes, they're all bilge rats by the look of them.",
                                "Shut up!",
                                "Just remember, this is no pleasure cruise. It won't be a pleasant voyage.",
                                "Not so fast. No shenanigans aboard my vessel, boy.",
                                "That scurvy brat thinks he can order me around!"
                        ],
                        "Smee": [
                                "What shall we do, Captain Hook?",
                                "But, Captain, you-know-who is also down-"
                        ],
                        "Philoctetes": [
                                "Good timing. Give me a hand, will ya? Move that pedestal over there for me.",
                                "I gotta spruce this place up for the games.",
                                "What? Too heavy? Since when have you been such a little-"
                        ],
                        "Pooh": [
                                "Think, think. Think, think.",
                                "Nothing. Just thinking.",
                                "I was thinking of how to say goodbye to Pooh."
                        ]
                },
                "???????": {
                        "Selphie": [
                                "What's most important to you?",
                                "Is friendship such a big deal?"
                        ],
                        "Jasmine": [
                                "Who's there? Hello?",
                                "I'm Jasmine. My father is the sultan of Agrabah."
                        ],
                        "Clayton": [
                                "Highly doubtful.",
                                "A circus of clowns. Not much use for hunting gorillas."
                        ]
                },
                "?????": {
                        "Wakka": [
                                "What do you want outta life?",
                                "To be strong, huh?"
                        ],
                        "Mickey":[
                                "Riku, can you hear me? I'll be there soon.","I have the other Keyblade-the one that belongs to this","I've been trying to get through to you, but the darkness in your heart kept me away.", "Your heart won the battle against the darkness", "The Door of Darkness will open soon, but it's a door we can't enter.", "Don't you feel the echoes of their hearts? You already know the answer."
                        ],
                        "Tidus": [
                                "What are you so afraid of?",
                                "Being indecisive? Is that really so frightening?"
                        ],
                        "Hades": [
                                "That little squirt took down that Heartless! Who'd have thought it?"
                        ],
                        "Jafar": [
                                "Such is the power of the Keyblade. The child's strength is not his own.",
                                "What drew the Heartless to that world?",
                                "A weak-hearted fool like him stood no chance against the Heartless. But the boy is a problem. He found one of the Keyholes.",
                                "The Heartless are searching for it now. I'm certain we'll find it soon enough. So that just leaves..."
                        ],
                        "Oogie Boogie": [
                                "You're no prize yourself.",
                                "Yeah, he got chomped instead!"
                        ],
                        "Fairy Godmother": [
                                "Hello. I'm the Fairy Godmother. Your king asked me to help, too. I will assist throughout your journey."
                        ],
                        "Ariel": [
                                "Come on, Sebastian!"
                        ],
                        "Mayor": [
                                "And now, allow me to introduce..."
                        ],
                        "Peter Pan": [
                                "Ahem!",
                                "How ya doin' there? Looking for a way out?",
                                "I'm the answer to your prayers.",
                                "Okay, then. Fine. Have it your way.",
                                "No. I'm just waiting for someone.",
                                "Tinker Bell, what took you so long?",
                                "Great job. So you found Wendy?",
                                "Hold on. There was another girl there, too?",
                                "Are you crazy? There's no way I'm gonna leave Wendy there!",
                                "Come on, Tink! Open up the door!",
                                "I'm Peter Pan."
                        ],
                        "Wendy": [
                                "Peter? Peter Pan?"
                        ],
                        "Ansem": [
                                "I've come to see the door to this world.",
                                "This world has been connected.",
                                "Tied to the darkness... Soon to be completely eclipsed.",
                                "You do not yet know what lies beyond the door.",
                                "There is so very much to learn. You understand so little.",
                                "A meaningless effort. One who knows nothing can understand nothing.",
                                "Know this.",
                                "The heart that is strong and true shall win the Keyblade.",
                                "For that instant, it was.",
                                "However, you can become stronger.",
                                "You showed no fear in stepping through the door to darkness. It held no terror for you. Plunge deeper into the darkness, and your heart will grow even stronger.",
                                "It's really quite simple. Open yourself to the darkness. That is all. Let your heart, your being become darkness itself."
                        ]
                },
                "???": {
                        "Cid": [
                                "Hey there, how can I... Aw, it's only a kid.",
                                "Okay, okay, simmer down. So why the long face, Sora? You lost or somethin'?",
                                "Huh?",
                                "Don't call me gramps! The name's Cid!"
                        ]
                },
                "??????": {
                        "Leon": [
                                "They'll come at you out of nowhere.",
                                "And they'll keep on coming at you, as long as you continue to wield the Keyblade.",
                                "But why? Why would it choose a kid like you?",
                                "Never mind. Now, let's see that Keyblade.",
                                "All right, then have it your way."
                        ],
                        "Aerith": [
                                "Excuse me. Did the king send you?"
                        ],
                        "Yuffie": [
                                "I'm the great ninja Yuffie.",
                                "Hey, you found it. Nice going, Leon."
                        ],
                        "Ursula": [
                                "Why don't we turn him into a Heartless?",
                                "That'll settle things quick enough.",
                                "Yes, the princesses..."
                        ],
                        "Tarzan": [
                                "Sabor, danger.",
                                "Thank you.",
                                "This place, this place.",
                                "Friends!",
                                "Look for Riku, friends?",
                                "Kairi, friends?",
                                "Friends here.",
                                "Tarzan. Tarzan go."
                        ],
                        "Merlin": [
                                "Well, well.",
                                "You've arrived sooner than I expected.",
                                "Of course.",
                                "Oh, my. No. My name is Merlin. As you can see, I am a sorcerer. I spend much of my time traveling. It's good to be home. Your king has requested my help."
                        ],
                        "Piglet": [
                                "Hello, i-is anyone there?",
                                "Wh-Wh-What am I to do? I'm all alone. (calling) Pooh? Pooh? Where are you? It's me, Piglet."
                        ],
                        "Rabbit": [
                                "Nobody's home! And I'm out of honey!",
                                "That's right, Nobody!",
                                "No! No Rabbit here! There's no one here!"
                        ],
                        "Tigger": [
                                "Hey, there! Name's Tigger! T-I-double-guh-RR. That spells Tigger!"
                        ],
                        "Jiminy": [
                                "Over here!",
                                "Cricket's the name. Jiminy Cricket, at your service."
                        ],
                        "Xemnas": [
                                "Ah, it seems you are special, too.",
                                "That name rings familiar.",
                                "You remind me of him.",
                                "It means you are not whole.",
                                "You are incomplete. Allow me-to test your strength.",
                                "Impressive.",
                                "This will be enjoyable.",
                                "It is beyond your comprehension, for now.",
                                "Until we meet again.",
                                "I am-",
                                "... but a mere shell."
                        ]
                },
                "??????????": {
                        "Maleficent": [
                                "Enough.",
                                "The Keyblade has chosen him. Will it be he who conquers the darkness? Or will the darkness swallow him? Either way, he could be quite useful.",
                                "As you wish. Fight to your heart's content.",
                                "The hunter lured them there. It was his lust for power that was the bait. But it seems the bait was too tasty for his own good.",
                                "Fear not. It will take him ages to find the rest.",
                                "Besides, he remains blissfully unaware of our other plan.",
                                "They are falling into our hands, one by one. Speaking of which..."
                        ]
                },
                "????????": {
                        "Geppetto": [
                                "What have you got there, Pinocchio?",
                                "Really? With this big block? You think so?",
                                "Oh, my. So the whale swallowed all of you, too? My goodness.",
                                "My name is Geppetto. I'm Pinocchio's father. When we got separated, I traveled all over, looking for him."
                        ]


Kingdom Hearts 2
                        "Ansem (Ansem, Seeker of Darkness)": [
                                "This world has been connected.",
                                "Tied to the darkness...",
                                "You understand nothing."
                        ],
                        "Ansem (Riku-Ansem)": [
                                "But... why would the Nobodies steal photographs?",
                                "Can you feel Sora?",
                                "Is it really that hard to make a beach?",
                                "And this?",
                                "Say no more, Naminé.",
                                "It's best he doesn't know the truth.",
                                "Was that Naminé made of data?",
                                "Calm down.",
                                "So what happened?",
                                "Naminé?... She's a wonder.",
                                "But whose Nobody is she?",
                                "It's Ansem."
                        ],
                        "Roxas": [
                                "Who are you?",
                                "Shut up!",
                                "Someone from the dark.",
                                "Riku? ... I defeated a Riku once.",
                                "Tell me... Tell me why he picked you!",
                                "I see. That's why.",
                                "What!?"
                        ],
                        "Demyx": [
                                "Run! Run away!",
                                "Huh? Ah! You!"
                        ]
                },
                "????": {
                        "Dusk": [
                                "We have come for you, my liege."
                        ],
                        "Axel": [
                                "Roxas. All right. Fight fight fight.",
                                "You really don't remember? It's me. You know, Axel."
                        ],
                        "Riku": [
                                "Why!? Why do you have the Keyblade?"
                        ],
                        "Saïx": [
                                "Impressive.",
                                "By the way, have you seen a man named Axel? I expect he's here somewhere.",
                                "You see, Axel's no longer acting in our best interest.",
                                "Yes.",
                                "Don't let your guard down. Axel will stop at nothing to turn you into a Heartless.",
                                "Glad to hear it. Axel aside, it would break our hearts to hear something happened to you.",
                                "True, we don't have hearts."
                        ]
                },
                "??????": {
                        "Xemnas": [
                                "I've been to see him. He looks a lot like you.",
                                "You're doing well.",
                                "This calls for a celebration...",
                                "The Keyblade... a truly marvelous weapon. Were it only in more... capable hands...",
                                "What a shame... And here I thought we could be friends.",
                                "How long has it been since I abandoned that name...",
                                "I know nothing of any Kairi. As for Riku... Perhaps you should ask your king."
                        ],
                        "Xigbar": [
                                "Oopsy-daisy!",
                                "Now, do you think that's polite, shutting me down like that?",
                                "As if! You can talk all you want, but that won't change a thing.",
                                "See, that would work---if I were just any old dude. 'Cept I'm not. I'm with the Organization. Nothing \\any old\\ about me.",
                                "Oh, dear. I think you got the wrong impression.",
                                "As if! Why don't I remind you how tough the crowd you're dealing with really is?",
                                "That's RIGHT, he used to give me that same exact look.",
                                "Gee... I just don't know.",
                                "Be a good boy now!"
                        ],
                        "Xaldin": [
                                "It's time you dealt with Belle. She's scheming to take everything you have. This castle, your precious rose. And then---your life. Trust no one. Feed your anger! Only anger will keep you strong.",
                                "What? To love, and be loved in return? Who could ever love a beast?",
                                "See? She has accomplices.",
                                "A welcome indeed."
                        ],
                        "Luxord": [
                                "The Darkness of men's hearts---drawn to these cursed medallions; and this Heartless---a veritable maelstrom of avarice:",
                                "I wonder, are they worthy to serve Organization XIII?",
                                "Precisely!"
                        ]


Kingdom Hearts 3
                                "Girl": ["Is anyone theeere?"],
                                "Saïx": ["Shouldn't you say good-bye to your REAL home?"],
                                "Xion": ["We need him alive."],
                                "Xigbar": [
                                        "Finally, back where it belongs.",
                                        "Yep."],
                                "Mike": [
                                        "What?! Careful, Sulley. If they see the K-I-D... ",
                                        "But you're the CEO! You set the example.",
                                        "Guys! Guys, it's not what it looks like.",
                                        "We gotta call the CDA.",
                                        "Yes! I mean",
                                        "We're done with scare power"],
                                "Elsa":[
                                        "Why are you here?",
                                        "Are you visiting Arendelle?",
                                        "Elsa... Queen Elsa of Arendelle"],
                                "Olaf":[
                                        "Wow! Look at all the pretty colors.",
                                        "Just like my buttons",
                                        "Silly spiky grass.",
                                        "I can't wait to meet Elsa.",
                                        "Um, well, I guess"],
                                "Anna":[
                                        "Hello. Olaf, are these your friends?",
                                        "I'm Anna."],
                                "Jack Sparrow":["Hail, Sora!"],
                                "Riku Replica":[
                                        "Didn't expect to see you again.",
                                        "Why did you even come here?",
                                        "Do you want some help?",
                                        "Me? I'm... ",
                                        "How long have you known that I was with you?"],
                                "Riku":["Are you done messing around?"],
                                "Dusk":["Do you seek our liege?"],
                                "Hiro":[
                                        "Go Go! You okay?",
                                        "Go Go.",
                                        "Baymax!",
                                        "Got it.",
                                        "Hey! Who are you?",
                                        "Name's Hiro."],
                                "Aqua":[
                                        "This Keyblade",
                                        "Mickey... "]},
                "?????":{
                                "Demyx": [
                                        "Finally. 'Bout time.",
                                        "Oh, please. You couldn't do it last time."],
                                "Ienzo": [
                                        "The data has been encrypted",
                                        "Oh... I guess we haven't spoken since"],
                                "Pence": ["What? Hold up!"],
                                "Ansem": ["So, you think you can bring Roxas back?"],
                                "Flynn": [
                                        "Make way! Make way!",
                                        "Say, since you three seem to know",
                                        "You have my thanks.",
                                        "The horse was enough.",
                                        "Oh, nothing, nothing. Name's Flynn."],
                                "Roxas": [
                                        "Hands off my friends."
                                ],
                                "Vexen": [
                                        "Oh, yes... of course.",
                                        "He ripped me away from the one thing I care about.",
                                        "Yes.",
                                        "Soon they will replace, not just replicate",
                                        "My dear master. You are safe."
                                ]},
                "??????":{
                                "Sulley":["Weeee!","Hmm? I wonder who those guys are."],
                                "Xigbar": ["Oh, wow! Very nice, full marks."],
                                "Hayner":[
                                        "Where'd they come from",
                                        "Hey, there."],
                                "Xemnas":["Let them believe as much."],
                                "Luxord":["What? So that we can rot away on the bottom rung?"],
                                "Mother Gothel": ["The outside world is a dangerous place."],
                                "Olette":["Get the ice cream later!"]},
                "???????": {"Randall": [
                                                "Oh, I just got a great idea",
                                                "Who cares? All that matters",
                                                "... is that it's the last turn"],
                                        "Vanitas":[
                                                "Gotta say, that strange facade",
                                                "We haven't ever met in the flesh",
                                                "That was a neat trick."],
                                        "Larxene":[
                                                "And how is it any of your business?",
                                                "Excuse me? Oh yeah, you forgot"],
                                        "Scrooge":[
                                                "Well, bless my bagpipes!"],
                                        "Ephemer": ["Need some help?"]
                                        },
                "????????": {
                                "Chirithy":[
                                        "Can't stay away, now, can you?",
                                        "The name's Chirithy"],
                                "Rapunzel":["Why can't I go outside?"],
                                "Young Xehanort":["I can make it move for you."],
                                "Marluxia": [
                                        "Missing someone?",
                                        "\"Has-beens\"? Now why would you say that?",
                                        "My name is Marluxia"],
                                "Kristoff": ["I'm Kristoff"]
Kingdom Hearts 3B
                "Everyone": {
                        "Sora, Goofy, Donald, Riku, Mickey & Yen Sid": ["WHOA!"],
                        "Sora, Donald, Goofy & Mickey": [
                                "And one for all!",
                                "And one for all!",
                                "All for one, and one for all!",
                                "All for one, and one for all!"
                        ]
                },
                "???": {
                        "Lea": [
                                "Where...",
                                "What happened to me? Roxas?",
                                "That's me.",
                                "Dilan, Aeleus, Even, Ienzo -",
                                "We're people again. But only the ones who joined the Organization here.",
                                "I guess Xehanort doesn't count",
                                "Where are they? I've turned this castle upside down.",
                                "Hey. Are the other two still out cold?",
                                "Gotcha. Well, I guess I'll give the castle grounds a sweep.",
                                "So do ya think they were blasted off to some other world, or what?",
                                "No, look, okay - the fact is - we're here. We've been recompleted, right? So they should be here too - plain and simple.",
                                "What a drag. Could they not have been recompleted at all?",
                                "Ah! Forget it.",
                                "You know what? I'll bring 'em back myself.",
                                "Why do I always get stuck with the icky jobs?",
                                "Axel didn't. My name is Lea."
                        ],
                        "Sam": [
                                "Are you a prisoner?",
                                "Name's Sam.",
                                "We're on the Grid.",
                                "Riku!"
                        ],
                        "CLU": [
                                "You're in luck.",
                                "Only a precious few are granted Light Cycle battle privileges.",
                                "I'll show you."
                        ]
                },
                "????": {
                        "Neku": [
                                "Shut it.",
                                "Talk about noise... ",
                                "Sora, right?",
                                "Looks like you're not a Player.",
                                "C'mon, keep up. In the Game.",
                                "Players get marked with the time limit. And this Game, I can't afford to lose. I need my Game partner.",
                                "What? Time out. Do you trust every total stranger you meet?",
                                "Now we're friends? It's not that easy.",
                                "Yeah, sounds great. Whatever.",
                                "Dream Eaters!",
                                "Not me. Them.",
                                "Don't let 'em surround us! Let's split up!",
                                "Oh uh, and... it's Neku."
                        ],
                        "Beat": [
                                "I gotchu now, Joshua!",
                                "Once I take you down, yo, me and Rhyme is goin' back were we belong!"
                        ],
                        "Pete": ["What am I up to?"],
                        "Riku": [
                                "Sora!",
                                "You've gotta wake up... ",
                                "Sora, don't chase the dreams. They'll lead you nowhere, just to an abyss you'll never be able to wake up from.",
                                "Sora! Don't! You've gotta wake up! Sora!"
                        ]
                },
                "?????": {
                        "Ansem": [
                                "Hey! Is this how you wanted it?",
                                "I am... ",
                                "That's not my name. I'm not \"Xehanort.\"",
                                "My name... is Ansem.",
                                "This world has been connected.",
                                "That is right."
                        ],
                        "Rhyme": [
                                "Huh?",
                                "Umm... I'm not really sure. All I know is that my name is Rhyme."
                        ],
                        "Shiki": [
                                "Hey, do you mind?",
                                "Seriously, thanks. I'm Shiki, how 'bout you?"
                        ],
                        "Roxas": [
                                "Hey, Axel. You haven't forgotten?",
                                "You made us a promise.",
                                "That you'd always be there... to bring us back.",
                                "Got it memorized?"
                        ],
                        "Ansem the Wise": ["You were not the visitor I expected."]
                },
                "??????": {
                        "Joshua": [
                                "Wow! Where's your Portal?",
                                "It takes something special to jump between grounds without one.",
                                "My name is Joshua.",
                                "Hold on, Sora."
                        ],
                        "Frollo": [
                                "Slippery vermin!",
                                "I'm beginning to question having summoned you back from the wars, Captain Phoebus."
                        ],
                        "Jiminy": [
                                "That Pinocchio - he must have his poor father worried sick.",
                                "Still, that little fella's some miracle. Imagine... Mr. Geppetto's wooden puppet, brought to life by the Blue Fairy.",
                                "She made his wish for a son come true because he's given so much happiness to others. Now Pinocchio needs me to guide him and be his conscience, so maybe one day, he can be a real -",
                                "Well, now, let's not get ahead of ourselves, Jiminy.",
                                "Did ya say you were really going to help us find Pinocchio?"
                        ],
                        "Quorra": [
                                "Look at that boy's weapon. It's different.",
                                "Hey, that weapon. Can I see it?",
                                "This is just incredible. What a program - the weapon and the wielder.",
                                "What a strange User. You're nothing like Flynn or Sam. Come on, Sora. I'll show you the way."
                        ],
                        "Xemnas": ["The memory and heart are tightly linked.", "Indeed."],
                        "Xigbar": [
                                "Aw, what's the matter, sleepyhead?",
                                "We jumped through a lot of hoops to get you here.",
                                "But it looks as if it's gonna pay off."
                        ],
                        "Mickey": ["Stopza!"]
                },
                "???????": "Phoebus",
        "????????": {
            "Xehanort": [
                "How did you get here?",
                "By choice or chance? You cannot control what you're not aware of.",
                "This wakeless sleep will be your prison... to wander forever.",
                "Your best friend is never far.",
                "Still afraid of the dark, I see.",
                "Hypocrite. You are the one who has made your heart a prison... ",
                "Even if you are not the prisoner.",
                "That's what we do. Put the most precious memories in the back of our minds where they're safe.",
                "Or in your case, the most precious... hearts?",
                "You think this is the realm of dreams, but there, you are mistaken. Data does not dream, cannot dream.",
                "This world is real. You haven't the slightest idea where you are - that you have already wandered off the path.",
                "So easily you sink into the depths of slumber.",
                "Beautiful world, isn't it? Almost like a dream.",
                "You really haven't caught on? Or are you just assuming it's all part of your little \"test\"? I'm not part of the dream. And if you thought I was... ",
                "... then you're softer than they say.",
                "But... this will all be over soon.",
                "Sleep on and we will meet again.",
                "Yes. The boy chosen by the Keyblade - Riku.",
                "It was yours first, wasn't it? But you succumbed to the darkness you could not control, and your prize - the Keyblade - passed onto Sora instead. Your mistakes always end up being other people's problems.",
                "Once again you performed predictably, although on a grander scale than I imagined.",
                "I don't know how you did it, but you really have found a way to trap darkness inside your heart. And a boy who's immune to darkness is of no use to us.",
                "Your abyss awaits.",
                "Come with me.",
                "Yes. This was where it started.",
                "At this point, I still had no idea that I was talking to myself. He cast away his bodily form just to set me on the appointed path.",
                "That is Xehanort reduced to just a heart - the being you and your friends called \"Ansem.\"",
                "Yes. The point in time that Xigbar mentioned.",
                "To move through time, you must leave your body behind. Ansem first sent me on my way, and then placed himself here when the time was right. That was what set all these events in motion.",
                "No, not everything. But remember, Ansem possessed Riku and saw his experiences in real time.",
                "Simple.",
                "You've been here many times.",
                "Your first journey... your voyage through memories... in the datascape... in your dreams. Relived again and again... like déjà vu.",
                "You just make it too easy. I know you think you've won, but you lost the moment you dived this far in. You're in the deepest pit of slumber, and you've worn yourself down to nothing. There's no returning to the world above.",
                "We told you. It was not the Sleeping Keyholes that guided you. They are not the reason you are here. You've been on a path, one we laid out for you. That sigil on your chest is the proof.",
                "See? That sigil, the X, it tells us where you are at all times.",
                "You had wondered aloud before - why we kept showing up where you were. It's because we need you, Sora. Or, to be more precise, we need what will be left of you - the thirteenth dark vessel.",
                "Why was it assured you could come here today? Because I followed my destined path, and I'm here looking at you right now. You can move through time, but time itself is immovable."
            ],
            "Geppetto": [
                "Pinocchio!",
                "Son! Where have you run off to?"
            ]
        },
        "?????????": {
            "Esmeralda": [
                "Thank you. You stood up for me.",
                "I'm Esmeralda."
            ],
            "Quasimodo": [
                "Who... who are you?",
                "Oh. M-my name's Quasimodo. I'm very sorry, but the Archdeacon is away."
            ]


Kingdom Hearts 3D
                        "Sora": [
                                "I've been having these weird thoughts lately... Like, is any of this for real or not?",
                                "Yes.",
                                "I can't open it...",
                                "Friendship.",
                                "To be strong.",
                                "Being indecisive.",
                                "Sounds good.",
                                "Whoa!",
                                "Gimme a break, Kairi."
                        ],
                        "Leon":[
                                "Sora. You did it."
                        ],
                        "Riku": [
                                "Hey!"
                        ],
                        "Captain Hook": [
                                "And the brat's friends are the king's lackeys. Swoggle me eyes, they're all bilge rats by the look of them.",
                                "Shut up!",
                                "Just remember, this is no pleasure cruise. It won't be a pleasant voyage.",
                                "Not so fast. No shenanigans aboard my vessel, boy.",
                                "That scurvy brat thinks he can order me around!"
                        ],
                        "Smee": [
                                "What shall we do, Captain Hook?",
                                "But, Captain, you-know-who is also down-"
                        ],
                        "Philoctetes": [
                                "Good timing. Give me a hand, will ya? Move that pedestal over there for me.",
                                "I gotta spruce this place up for the games.",
                                "What? Too heavy? Since when have you been such a little-"
                        ],
                        "Pooh": [
                                "Think, think. Think, think.",
                                "Nothing. Just thinking.",
                                "I was thinking of how to say goodbye to Pooh."
                        ]
                },
                "???????": {
                        "Selphie": [
                                "What's most important to you?",
                                "Is friendship such a big deal?"
                        ],
                        "Jasmine": [
                                "Who's there? Hello?",
                                "I'm Jasmine. My father is the sultan of Agrabah."
                        ],
                        "Clayton": [
                                "Highly doubtful.",
                                "A circus of clowns. Not much use for hunting gorillas."
                        ]
                },
                "?????": {
                        "Wakka": [
                                "What do you want outta life?",
                                "To be strong, huh?"
                        ],
                        "Mickey":[
                                "Riku, can you hear me? I'll be there soon.","I have the other Keyblade-the one that belongs to this","I've been trying to get through to you, but the darkness in your heart kept me away.", "Your heart won the battle against the darkness", "The Door of Darkness will open soon, but it's a door we can't enter.", "Don't you feel the echoes of their hearts? You already know the answer."
                        ],
                        "Tidus": [
                                "What are you so afraid of?",
                                "Being indecisive? Is that really so frightening?"
                        ],
                        "Hades": [
                                "That little squirt took down that Heartless! Who'd have thought it?"
                        ],
                        "Jafar": [
                                "Such is the power of the Keyblade. The child's strength is not his own.",
                                "What drew the Heartless to that world?",
                                "A weak-hearted fool like him stood no chance against the Heartless. But the boy is a problem. He found one of the Keyholes.",
                                "The Heartless are searching for it now. I'm certain we'll find it soon enough. So that just leaves..."
                        ],
                        "Oogie Boogie": [
                                "You're no prize yourself.",
                                "Yeah, he got chomped instead!"
                        ],
                        "Fairy Godmother": [
                                "Hello. I'm the Fairy Godmother. Your king asked me to help, too. I will assist throughout your journey."
                        ],
                        "Ariel": [
                                "Come on, Sebastian!"
                        ],
                        "Mayor": [
                                "And now, allow me to introduce..."
                        ],
                        "Peter Pan": [
                                "Ahem!",
                                "How ya doin' there? Looking for a way out?",
                                "I'm the answer to your prayers.",
                                "Okay, then. Fine. Have it your way.",
                                "No. I'm just waiting for someone.",
                                "Tinker Bell, what took you so long?",
                                "Great job. So you found Wendy?",
                                "Hold on. There was another girl there, too?",
                                "Are you crazy? There's no way I'm gonna leave Wendy there!",
                                "Come on, Tink! Open up the door!",
                                "I'm Peter Pan."
                        ],
                        "Wendy": [
                                "Peter? Peter Pan?"
                        ],
                        "Ansem": [
                                "I've come to see the door to this world.",
                                "This world has been connected.",
                                "Tied to the darkness... Soon to be completely eclipsed.",
                                "You do not yet know what lies beyond the door.",
                                "There is so very much to learn. You understand so little.",
                                "A meaningless effort. One who knows nothing can understand nothing.",
                                "Know this.",
                                "The heart that is strong and true shall win the Keyblade.",
                                "For that instant, it was.",
                                "However, you can become stronger.",
                                "You showed no fear in stepping through the door to darkness. It held no terror for you. Plunge deeper into the darkness, and your heart will grow even stronger.",
                                "It's really quite simple. Open yourself to the darkness. That is all. Let your heart, your being become darkness itself."
                        ]
                },
                "???": {
                        "Cid": [
                                "Hey there, how can I... Aw, it's only a kid.",
                                "Okay, okay, simmer down. So why the long face, Sora? You lost or somethin'?",
                                "Huh?",
                                "Don't call me gramps! The name's Cid!"
                        ]
                },
                "??????": {
                        "Leon": [
                                "They'll come at you out of nowhere.",
                                "And they'll keep on coming at you, as long as you continue to wield the Keyblade.",
                                "But why? Why would it choose a kid like you?",
                                "Never mind. Now, let's see that Keyblade.",
                                "All right, then have it your way."
                        ],
                        "Aerith": [
                                "Excuse me. Did the king send you?"
                        ],
                        "Yuffie": [
                                "I'm the great ninja Yuffie.",
                                "Hey, you found it. Nice going, Leon."
                        ],
                        "Ursula": [
                                "Why don't we turn him into a Heartless?",
                                "That'll settle things quick enough.",
                                "Yes, the princesses..."
                        ],
                        "Tarzan": [
                                "Sabor, danger.",
                                "Thank you.",
                                "This place, this place.",
                                "Friends!",
                                "Look for Riku, friends?",
                                "Kairi, friends?",
                                "Friends here.",
                                "Tarzan. Tarzan go."
                        ],
                        "Merlin": [
                                "Well, well.",
                                "You've arrived sooner than I expected.",
                                "Of course.",
                                "Oh, my. No. My name is Merlin. As you can see, I am a sorcerer. I spend much of my time traveling. It's good to be home. Your king has requested my help."
                        ],
                        "Piglet": [
                                "Hello, i-is anyone there?",
                                "Wh-Wh-What am I to do? I'm all alone. (calling) Pooh? Pooh? Where are you? It's me, Piglet."
                        ],
                        "Rabbit": [
                                "Nobody's home! And I'm out of honey!",
                                "That's right, Nobody!",
                                "No! No Rabbit here! There's no one here!"
                        ],
                        "Tigger": [
                                "Hey, there! Name's Tigger! T-I-double-guh-RR. That spells Tigger!"
                        ],
                        "Jiminy": [
                                "Over here!",
                                "Cricket's the name. Jiminy Cricket, at your service."
                        ],
                        "Xemnas": [
                                "Ah, it seems you are special, too.",
                                "That name rings familiar.",
                                "You remind me of him.",
                                "It means you are not whole.",
                                "You are incomplete. Allow me-to test your strength.",
                                "Impressive.",
                                "This will be enjoyable.",
                                "It is beyond your comprehension, for now.",
                                "Until we meet again.",
                                "I am-",
                                "... but a mere shell."
                        ]
                },
                "??????????": {
                        "Maleficent": [
                                "Enough.",
                                "The Keyblade has chosen him. Will it be he who conquers the darkness? Or will the darkness swallow him? Either way, he could be quite useful.",
                                "As you wish. Fight to your heart's content.",
                                "The hunter lured them there. It was his lust for power that was the bait. But it seems the bait was too tasty for his own good.",
                                "Fear not. It will take him ages to find the rest.",
                                "Besides, he remains blissfully unaware of our other plan.",
                                "They are falling into our hands, one by one. Speaking of which..."
                        ]
                },
                "????????": {
                        "Geppetto": [
                                "What have you got there, Pinocchio?",
                                "Really? With this big block? You think so?",
                                "Oh, my. So the whale swallowed all of you, too? My goodness.",
                                "My name is Geppetto. I'm Pinocchio's father. When we got separated, I traveled all over, looking for him."


KingsQuest 2
                "Unknown": {
                        "Winged Horse": ["Thank you, kind sir", "SSSsssssss!"],
                        "Graham": ["YECCHHH!!"],
                        "Valanice": ["My name is Valanice", "Oh, Graham, I am forever", "Yes, of course I will!", "I love you, too!", "Come closer, kind sir."],
                        "Fish": ["In return for saving my life, I wish to offer you a ride across this ocean"]
                        }


KingsQuest3
                        "Mama Bear": ["AND STAY OUT!!!"],
                        "Fish 1": ["My, that was a tasty little bug."],
                        "Oracle": ["Years ago, a terrible", "Sadly, your own sister", "Behold the", "You, Gwydion", "are the only one"],
                        "Captain": ["Ya little cheat!"],
                        "Barmaid": ["I'll be happy to take yer order"],
                        "Pirate": ["Arrr!", "What d'ya think yer", "I gotcha, boy"],
                        "Sailor": ["You'd bet'er get aboard boy, or we'll sail without ya.", "Ya better skedaddle, sonny!", "Climb aboard, laddie! We won't be awaiting all day for ye."],
                        "Mouse": ["What happened to the last", "Didn't you hear?"],
                        "Cat": ["Screeeeeeeeee", "Get lost, Gwydion", "Ha, ha! Missed me", "HEY! That hu", "Ow! I'll get you for t", "Wait till I catch yo", "The next scratch is gonna be"],
                        "Manannan": ["Out of my way, Gwydion", "I mean it, boy.", "Gwydion, let this be a lesson to", "Attempt to use magic around me, ", "Shoo, boy! I don't want to", "our kitchen is filthy! ", "Gwydion, my chamber pot needs servicing.", "My office is dusty.", "You've been neglecting my chickens again", "When I assign a chore", "Go find something to do.", "Instead of fooling around in here", "You look mighty funny falling", "Gwydion, I have awakened.", "Gwydion, I have decided", "I have returned, Gwydion", "I am going to bed, Gwydion"],
                        "Gwydion": ["Wait a second"],
                        "Bird": ["I know what you mean"],
                        "Squirrel": ["Well, who are they", "I bet he can't.", "I know how you", "Not quite yet", "Do you?"],
                        "Lizard": ["Well,", "When he was a baby", "I would guess that he's probably"]
                        },
                "Fish 1": {
                        "Fish 2": ["Not well, I'm afraid. The school's much too crowded. They don't know if they're coming or going!"]
                        },
                "Bandit": {
                        "Barmaid": ["If ya says so", "That'll be two gold"],
                        "Gwydion": ["I'd like to buy these two gentlemen a round."]
                },
                "Barmaid":{
                        "Gwydion": ["I'd like to buy these two"],
                        "Bandit": [
                                "Wench! Come o'er here with more ale!"]
                },
                "Narrator": {
                        "Bandit": ["There ya go, boys. Now, drink up an' behave yer selves."]
                },
                "Manannan": {
                        "Gwydion": ["The kitchen floor is FILTHY"]
                },
                "Rosella": {
                        "Gwydion": ["I'm your long-lost brother"]
                },
                "Gwydion": {
                        "Bird": ["See that young fellow over there"],
            "Bandit": ["...squirmed jist like a pig."],
                        "Squirrel 1":["Have you got your winter's supply"],
                        "Squirrel 2": ["Not quite yet", "Do you?"],
                        "Bird 1": ["See that young fellow over there?"]
                },
                "Squirrel": {
                        "Squirrel 1": [
                                "See that young man over there?",
                                "Poor thing, he doesn't even know",
                                "He's really a prince.",
                                "That boy over there lives with the terrible wizard",
                                "I bet he can't.",
                                "Manannan's terrorizing the countryside again",
                                "Have you got your winter's supply",
                                "Oh sure",
                                "Ages ago."],
                        "Squirrel 2": [""]
                },
                "Lizard" : {
                        "Lizard 2": [
                                "No, I haven't heard that story",
                                "How did he get here?",
                                "That's too bad,",
                                "I agree. What do you think",
                                "That's terrible",
                                "I know how much they hurt"],
                        "Lizard 1": [""]
                },
                "Fish": {
                        "Fish 1": ["See that boy swimming here?",
                                                "He's really from the Kingdom of Daventry.",
                                                "There's that boy from Daventry",
                                                "I wonder if he would like to return",
                                                "How are your smallfry doing in school?",
                                                "That boy ought to swim back to shore",
                                                "I'm afraid he'll drown way out here"],
                        "Fish 2": [""]
                },
                "Bird": {
                        "Bird 1": ["Notice that boy down there?", 
                                        "I know what you mean", 
                                        "Do you think that young man looks anything",
                                        "Well, he ain't exactly chopped liver",
                                        "I'm getting so frustrated!",
                                        "No matter how early I get up",
                                        "Hah!",
                                        "That's easy for you to say"],
                        "Bird 2": [""]
                },
                "Mouse": {
                        "Mouse 1": [
                                "Do you know where the pirates are taking us?",
                                "Oh, I remember!",
                                "Remember when they first buried",
                                "You know the pirate's buried treasure?",
                                "Well, I just heard the captain talking",
                                "What do you think the pirates",
                                "What happened to the last cabin boy they had?",
                                "I heard the pirates talking about bringing a CAT on board!",
                                "I mean it!",
                                "It's getting so musty",
                                "Yes, but it is safer down here",
                                "I guess we gotta take the bad"
                        ],
                        "Mouse 2": [""]


KingsQuest4
                        "Ogress": ["JUST A MINUTE! I'M COMIN'!"],
                        "Fisherman's wife": ["Jest come on in!"],
                        "Fisherman": ["D'ya know what TIME it is?! GO AWAY!!"],
                        "Frog prince": ["Ribbit! Ribbit!"],
                        "Dwarf": [
                                "Go away!",
                                "We're all asleep here! Come back tomorrow!",
                                "...and STAY OUT!"
                        ],
                        "Robin": ["Cheep, cheep!"],
                        "Ogre": ["Got ya!"],
                        "Swamp monster": ["Oh, boy! I sure love frog legs!"],
                        "Cockatoo": ["Polly want a cracker!"],
                        "Rosella": [
                                "Phew! I hope that's the last of it!",
                                "Oh, my goodness!!",
                                "A CHASM!!!",
                                "Aaaaahhhhhhh!!",
                                "Oh, Father!",
                                "You're still young; you should have many years ahead of you! Oh, I wish I could help you, Father!",
                                "Aaaaahhhhhhh!!",
                                "Polly want a cracker?"
                        ],
                        "Graham": [
                                "Help me,",
                                "Never felt better in my life",
                                "What is IN this fruit"
                        ],
                        "Raven": ["Caw, caw!", "Caw! Caw!"],
                        "Edgar": ["Rosella,", "I love you. Will"]
                },
                "Rosella": {
                        "Lolotte": [
                                "I don't know how",
                                "Bring me the hen",
                                "If you do just ONE MORE",
                                "I want to have Pandora's Box",
                                "Take her away",
                                "My son, Edgar,",
                                "You'll be married first",
                                "You will sleep in Edgar's",
                                "Rosella. What a pretty name",
                                "Let us relieve you of your burdensome"
                        ],
                        "Frog prince": [
                                "Well, ta, ta,",
                                "I'm off. Here, you may keep THIS!"
                        ],
                        "Edgar": ["You may now walk freely about the castle. I..."],
                        "Dwarf": ["Is Daventry far from Tamir?", "How did you get here?"],
                        "Graham": [
                                "Never felt better in my life!",
                                "What is IN this fruit, anyway?"
                        ],
                        "Minstrel": [
                                "Well, well. Who do we have here?",
                                "Hello, Rosella,",
                                "Let me play for you one of my favorite tunes,",
                                "This is wonderful!",
                                "This gives me a new lease on life! No longer am I a mere minstrel...now I will become a famous ACTOR! 'TO BE OR NOT TO BE.' How's that?"
                        ],
                        "Genesta" : [
                                "It will not be easy to reach",
                                "Do you really mean that?",
                                "I am,",
                                "Look in the magic mirror.",
                                "I am the fairy, Genesta.",
                                "But, this is no ordinary fruit;",
                                "Good-bye! We'll never forget you",
                                "Lolotte is very evil",
                                "Further, I cannot send you home without my talisman."
                        ]
                },
                "Lolotte": {
                        "Rosella": ["Rosella."]
                },
                "Genesta": {
                        "Rosella": ["YES!!", "I'm sorry Edgar,"],
                        "Edgar": ["Rosella,", "I love you. Will you marry me?"]
                },
                "Dwarf": {
                        "Rosella": ["Daventry."]
                },
                "Ogre": {
                        "Genesta": [
                                "My little Hen!",
                                "Where ever did you find her?",
                                "Poor thing,",
                                "Well, at least she's back home now."
                        ]
                },
                "Dwarf near diamond bucket": {
                        "Rosella": ["hello"]


KingsQuest5
                "Cedric":["Mooaaann!"]
                },
                "Harpies": {
                        "Harpy 1": [
                                "Where did you find HIM, Minotta?",
                                "What is he doing?"],
                        "Harpy 2 (Minotta)": ["We found him on the beach","Don't be so picky."],
                        "Harpy 3 (Cruleena)": ["I don't know"],
                        "Harpies 1 and 2": ["Hey, that's not fair!"]
KingsQuest6
                        "Rosella": ["A troll?! EEEEEEEE!","Did it work?","Eeeow", "Yech.","Eeow.", "Oh, that's odd", "Oh no! She can't!","Hmm?","BRIDE?!", "AAAAAAAAAA","I'm a","A troll?!", "Yech!", "I already have some of those", "I already have a brass bowl", "They could cook a", "I'm not letting HIM out", "Bleh", "I suppose I should", "That guy just won't", "That doesn't look too", "It's a little cart", "Hmmm ... I wonder", "I wonder if I could somehow", "I can't do ANYTHING", "That MIGHT work", "Rats.", "Nope.", "I don't think there are that", "Your majesty?", "It's too small", "No. I might need that", "Wow. You could melt", "That's way too hot to touch", "I should let the poor", "I don't even know that guy", "Whew. That's better!", "No ... it's not tall enough yet"],
                        "Valanice": ["Oh! That's right. The salesman", "Words will get me nowhere", "Mmmmmmmm!", "Taking advantage of"],
                        "Mathilde": ["OW!","Who are you, missy?","Baloney, little girl", "Of course you're not", "Well, not exactly", "Up above this kingdom is a dark land", "Wonderful! Now listen, girl.", "Well ... not exactly"],
                        "Malicia": ["No, look here!","There! you just be patient", "Try to escape", "They got away"],
                        "Hogarth": ["Dat was not funny"],
                        "King Otar":["I ... wasn't expecting you to be so lovely", "Oh, please, don't be sad", "Rosella, we must hurry!", "Don't worry, Princess", "Quickly, Princess!", "There now. Everyone will think", "Yes! Who", "STOP! We must talk, Princess", "Before us is the home of Malicia", "I have heard of a secret entrance", "Well done, Princess", "Fortunately, I have no nostrils"],
                        "Rude Forging Troll":["Snorkle", "Gzzzz"],
                        "Crystal Dragon": ["Farewell"],
                        "Bogeyman": ["WHO DARES DISTURB MY SLEEP?"],
                        "99 ???": [""]


Final Fantasy 2
                "Woman and Girl":["Woman 1","Girl 1"],
        "Dark Knight": "Leon",
        "Dragoon": "Gareth",
        "Knight": "Scott",
        "Man by Inn": "Woman by Inn",
        "Man at Entrance": {
            "Woman at Entrance": [
                "The men of Salamand have been enslaved to work in the cavern behind the Semitt Falls.",
                "Please help us!"


Final Fantasy 3


                        "Desch": ["Didn't expect to see","Huh? Oh. I'm Desch."]
                },
                "of the four orphans": "Nina",
                "Gigameth,the king's aide": "Gigameth",
                "King Alus": "Alus",
        "King": {
            "King Gorn": [
                "Die, sweet prince!",
                "Ughn ...",
                "I ... won't be controlled ...",
                "I'd rather die than kill my beloved son! Your plans are foiled!",
                "Alus ... my son! Gigameth had me under his spell ...",
                "I thought you'd never forgive me for exiling you ... But you came back. That is what gave me the strength to break free ... My son ... Please bring peace back to Saronia. Ungh ...",
                "I love you, Alus ..."
            ],
            "King Sasune": [
                "Princess Sara! You're safe!",
                "I'm worried about your safety ...",
                "I'm King Sasune. The Djinn cursed everyone ... To lift the curse, the Djinn must be resealed.",
                "In the Sealed Cave up north. We need a Mythril Ring to seal him.",
                "Oh! A Mythril Ring from Kazus was made for her! But where is she now? Did the Djinn take her? Oh no ...",
                "Such Warriors, you are! There's a secret path in the Sealed Cave. Find the skeleton key. Seal the Djinn, and save us all!",
                "Thank you, warriors. You have sealed the Djinn and rescued Princess Sara."
            ],
            "King Argus": [
                "I am King Argus, ruler of the lands north of the desert ... But now it's an empty kingdom. Hein has cursed my soldiers. I trusted Hein ... Cough ...",
                "I'm fine. Please, you must defeat Hein!",
                "Thank you, Warriors. Take this. It's the Argus family heirloom, the Time Wheel, a box created by the Ancients. Bring it to Cid in Canaan. You know him? That's great!",
                "Off to Canaan! Bring the Time Wheel to Cid!",
                "Cid built that airship? Now you can go anywhere, even off the continent!"
            ]


Final Fantasy 4
                        "Porom": [
                                "Did you need something?",
                                "Oh, that brother of mine... !",
                                "Your name is Cecil, right? Pleased to meet you."
                        ],
                        "Rydia": [
                                "Mother, you can't die! Just because your dragon did...",
                                "!",
                                "You - you're the ones who killed her dragon?",
                                "No!",
                                "Stay away!",
                                "Leave me alone! I hate you!!!!!",
                                "...",
                                "I'm sorry, it's all my fault.",
                                "But... you protected me.",
                                "My name's Rydia."
                        ]
                },
                "Man": {
                        "Tellah": [
                                "You, knight! You wield the dark sword, do you not? I beg you, lend me your aid!",
                                "My daughter Anna was tricked by a silver-tongued bard. He's taken her to Damcyan Castle. I fear I've little time. I sense something sinister."
                        ],
                        "Fusoya": [
                                "I am Fusoya, and I am charged with watching over the slumber of the Lunarians."
                        ]
                },
                "Voice": {
                        "Scarmiglione": ["Such pleasure I will take in delivering"],
                        "Kain": [
                                "Your Majesty!",
                                "I see you have the Crystal.",
                                "This way!",
                                "So you're Cecil!"
                        ],
                        "Mist Dragon": [
                                "Leave this place.",
                                "Return whence you came.",
                                "Men of Baron...",
                                "Leave at once, and no harm will befall you. I will abide no further trespass.",
                                "You mean to ignore my warning?",
                                "So be it."
                        ],
                        "Rosa": ["Cecil!", "Stop it!"],
                        "Cid": [
                                "Well, well! Look who's home!",
                                "Filthy imposter!",
                                "It's a good thing you've got me, then, isn't it?"
                        ],
                        "Baigan": ["Lord Cecil!"],
                        "Barbariccia": [
                                "Ha ha ha ha ha... It seems I underestimated you. I'd not have thought you strong enough to wound Lord Golbez!"
                        ],
                        "Calcabrina": ["Yip-ho-ho!"],
                        "Golbez/Theodor": [
                                "Our paths cross once again.",
                                "You are even more meddlesome than I had thought.",
                                "Kain... Return to me, my pawn... Deliver me the Crystal...",
                                "You!"
                        ],
                        "Fusoya": ["At last, you've arrived!"],
                        "Zemus": [
                                "A vile thing, isn't he? That brother of yours...",
                                "He is the root of all you've suffered.",
                                "If it weren't for him, your mother and father would both still be alive.",
                                "And you are a vile little insect birthed from a womb",
                                "I name you... Golbez!"
                        ]
                },
                "Boy": {
                        "Kain": ["I'm Kain - Kain Highwind."],
                        "Palom": [
                                "So you're that filthy dark knight from Baron! I'm only helping you because he told me to. You'd better be thankful!",
                                "What he means is that I'm Mysidia's most esteemed magical prodigy, and you're incredibly lucky to have me along!",
                                "Right... Nice to meet you."
                        ]
                },


                        "Cecil": ["Your Majesty... what's become of you?"],
                        "Narration": [
                                "Together with Kain,",
                                "The advent of the airship had marked ",
                                "With the unparalleled might of the Red Wings",
                                "And why have fearsome monsters suddenly begun to overrrun the once calm land?",
                                "If the crystals know, they share no answers"
                        ]
                },
                "King Of Baron": {
                        "Cagnazzo": [
                                "Cecil, you've returned at last! And all the stronger for your journey, by the looks of it.",
                                "Oh, and look at you! You've become a... a paladin, is it? I'm afraid that won't do at all.",
                                "Your liege? Who might that be? Oh, I think I've just remembered! You must mean that old fool who refused to surrender up this kingdom. Yes, that's it - the king of Baron! It's his part I've been playing all this time. Ha ha ha ha ha!",
                                "Would you like to go and see him, this king of yours? You'd best not mistake me for another Scarmiglione. How one as weak as he came to be crowned an archfiend is something I will never know. Mwa ha ha!",
                                "Does it, now? Indeed. Your loyalty and worth are proven once again, Captain Baigan. But the Crystal is all that matters. Bring him before me.",
                                "The kingdom of Baron hails your return, Cecil. You have brought me the Crystal, I trust?",
                                "So it is. See how it shines! That will be all, Cecil. You may leave us now.",
                                "Have you some other matter to discuss?",
                                "As does yours?",
                                "Do you take me for a fool, Cecil? Do you think your treasonous whisperings escape my ears? After all I've done for you, Cecil... You wound me. This is most unfortunate, but I can place no trust in one who offers none in return. I hereby relieve you of command of the Red Wings.",
                                "You will go now of the Valley of Mist instead. There is a task I would have you do. A phantom creature haunts the borders of that land - the Eidolon of Mist. You will slay it, and deliver this ring to the village that lies beyond - they will know its meaning. Be gone at first light on the morrow.",
                                "Ah, Kain. I was not aware this matter concerned you. But as you seem so eager to protect your friend, let your spear accompany his blade on the road to Mist.",
                                "I've no more words. Take the ring and begone, while my mood is yet fair!"
                        ]
                },
                "Ninja": {
                        "Edge": [
                                "We meet at last. I've been looking forward to this, Rubicante!",
                                "I'm Prince Edge of Eblan!"
                        ]


Final Fantasy 5
"Qu": {
                        "Quina": ["You got frog!","Me?"]
                }


Final Fantasy 6
"Girl": {
                        "Terra": [
                                "....",
                                "... ... ...",
                                "Where am I...?",
                                "...head...hurts...",
                                "I can't remember a thing...",
                                "My name... is... Terra..."
                        ],
                        "Madonna": [
                                "You're... an Esper? What's that pendant for?",
                                "Esper World... Boy, did I take the low road or what?",
                                "You the one who... saved me?"
                        ]
                },
                "Man": {
                        "Edgar": ["You mean, THIS young woman...?!", "Oh... sorry!"],
                        "Man 1": ["Of course. He left"],
                        "Man 2": [
                                "Shhh I'm a Returner",
                                "I... I'm gonna be sick!",
                                "Urghh... gonna toss it all"
                        ]
                },
                "Voice": {
                        "Sabin": ["Give it up, Vargas!"],
                        "Cyan": ["A moment Sir! Allow me the honor!"],
                        "Guard 1": ["Got her"]
                },
                "Elder": {
                        "Esper Elder": [
                                "We've no choice... We must do what we've been avoiding...",
                                "Here's the plan. We'll cause a tempest that'll sweep all the nasty creatures out of our realm. Then we'll seal the gate... I am the last of our kind able to cast this magical seal.",
                                "Pass away... but at least we will finally be safe.",
                                "Let's do it. We have no other choice."


Final Fantasy 7
                        "Voice in Cloud's head": [
                                "... ... You all right?",
                                "Back then... ...",
                                "What about now? Can you get up?",
                                "... ... Don't worry about me.",
                                "... ... How about that?",
                                "... seem pretty tired",
                                "I haven't slept in a bed like this",
                                "Ever since that time.",
                                "What are you doing in a place like this?",
                                "That's what I want to ask you. Should you be foolin' around here?",
                                "You can't change anything by just sitting back and looking at it.",
                                "It's started moving.",
                                "Wake up!",
                                "rub, rub,",
                                "Wake up!!",
                                "... That reminds me.",
                                "... You'll find out soon",
                                "When you went to Mt. Nibel then, Tifa was your guide, right?",
                                "But where was Tifa other than that?",
                                "It was a great chance for you two to see each other again.",
                                "Why couldn't you see each other alone?",
                                "Why don't you try asking Tifa?",
                                "Then, get up!",
                                "Wait! Just a little longer!",
                                "Yes, that was how it got started.",
                                "I couldn't figure it out, either.",
                                "I wasn't pursuing Sephiroth",
                                "Sephiroth? Sephiroth?",
                                "Run... Run to the end of the Cannon!!",
                                "... ... I was devastated",
                                "Who.....",
                                "Who... ... ?"
                        ],
                        "Reno": ["... ... I know you."],
                        "Sephiroth": [
                                "In my veins courses the blood of the Ancients."
                        ],
                        "Jenova": [
                                "Our purpose is to deliver the Black materia to our master.",
                                "Those who carry Jenova's cells",
                                "Of course... Sephiroth."
                        ],
                        "On-Screen": ["Five hundred years later..."]
                },
                "ACTION": {
                        "News Anchor": [
                                "And now for the news.",
                                "This just in. An accident today"
                        ],
                        "Library Notice": [
                                "Materials are non-circulating! It is forbidden to remove any materials from this floor.",
                                "This is the Scientific Research Library.",
                                "This is the Space Dev Research Library.",
                                "This is the Public Order/Weapon Development"
                        ],
                        "Ship Announcement": [
                                "Emergency alert! Reports of a suspicious character found! Those not on detail, search the ship. Report when found! I repeat. Suspicious character found on board! Those not on detail, search the ship. Report when found!",
                                "Dock workers--We will be docking in Costa del Sol in 5 minutes. Prepare for docking."
                        ],
                        "Race Announcement": [
                                "The race will start in a few moments. Will the jockeys for the next race, please proceed to the paddock. I repeat..."
                        ],
                        "Report": [
                                "\"Periodic Report to Professor Hojo\" 1 Clone Activity Report Unfortunately, no 'CLONES' have left this town this quarter. As previously reported, the 'CLONES' seem to be sensing something. But all they say is, 'reunion' or 'Sephiroth' and show no other signs of activity. 2 Confidentiality Report A total of eight people have visited this town this quarter. Fortunately, none knew about the incident five years ago. Therefore, no one knows the town was restored exactly as it was five years ago. Our staff, disguised as townspeople have improved their acting skills, and we do not report any problems at this time. That is all."
                        ],
                        "Military Announcement": [
                                "Emergency! Emergency! Weapon's approaching! Attention all military personnel: take your positions!",
                                "Weapon approaching! Speed, 50 Knots! It's heading right toward us!",
                                "Speed, 70 Knots! Weapon, closing in!! Not good! It's attacking!"
                        ],
                        "Submarine Radio": [
                                "... All Shinra Submarine Units, do you read... ? ... All Shinra Submarine Units, do you read... ?",
                                "... Report, No. 2...",
                                "... Roger... ... Your next mission is... ... Return to Junon Dock... ... We will transport the Huge Materia from the airport... ... Those without other assignments will report for guard duty... That is all. Over and out...",
                                "... Huge Materia recovered... ... no damage appears to have been sustained...",
                                "... analysis completed... ... exact date of origin cannot be determined... ... estimated to be several thousand years old..."
                        ],
                        "Control Panel": [
                                "Passcode input error Unauthorized User identified Protection System will activate in 3 minutes",
                                "Mission Orders: "
                        ],
                        "Voice on phone": [
                                "Someone has switched the machine over to mainframe operation! We can't operate it from here."
                        ],
                        "STATUS": ["With Cloud as the party leader", "With Tifa as the party leader"],
                        "Vincent": ["If she is happy then... I don't mind."],
                        "Train Announcement": [
                                "Last train out of Sector 8 Station. Last stop is Sector 7, Train Graveyard. Expected time of arrival is 12:23AM, Midgar Standard Time...",
                                "Good Morning, and welcome to Midgar lines. Arrival time at Sector 4 Station will 11:45.",
                                "Type A Security Alert!! Unidentified passengers confirmed... A search of all cars will be conducted! Repeat!! Type A Security Alert!! Unidentified passengers confirmed... A search of all cars will be conducted!",
                                "Unidentified passengers located in Car #1 Preparing for Lock Down",
                                "Car #1: Locked Down Upgrading to Level 2 Warning",
                                "Unidentified passengers located in Car #2 Preparing for Lock Down",
                                "Car #2: Locked down Upgrading to Warning Level 3",
                                "Unidentified Passengers: Moving to front of Train Currently tracking location",
                                "Car #3: Locked Down Upgrading to Warning Level 4",
                                "Car #4: Locked Down Upgrading to maximum security alert!!",
                                "Car #1: Locked Down Car being sent to the Station",
                                "Car #2: Locked down Car being sent to station",
                                "Car #4: Locked down Illegal ID will be taken to Station"]
                },
                "Cloud": {
                        
                },
                "Mechanics": ["Mechanic 1", "Mechanic 2", "Mechanic 3"],
                "Waitress" : {
                        "Wall Market Diner Waiter": [
                                "Welcome! Sit wherever you like!",
                                "Have a seat over here.",
                                "Yes, what will you have?",
                                "One [dish name].",
                                "In this store, you pay first.",
                                "Hey! Cancel that last order!",
                                "Thank you. Just a second.",
                                "Thank you. Here's an item coupon",
                                "Sorry! But we're completely full! Please come again!"
                        ],
                        "Costa del Sol Waitres": [""]
                },
                "Redhead": {
                        "Redhead (Junon)": ["I won't charge you for a smile"]
                },
                "Girls": ["Redhead (Junon)", "Black-haired Girl"],
                "Barkeeper": {
                        "Rocket Town Barkeeper": [
                                "Would you like something to drink?",
                                "Did you meet the Captain already?",
                                "... ... that's too bad. Please come again.",
                                "Cid's had some bad breaks.",
                                "You don't feel comfortable here?",
                                "Y'know, I heard Rufus rushed back to headquarters in Midgar"],
                        "Turtle's Paradise Barkeeper": [
                                "Hey, hey, welcome! You on a trip?",
                                "Seems like the town got really boisterous",
                                "First the ground started shaking",
                                "Seems like Palmer of Shinra, Inc",
                                "Even though they failed to blow up Meteor"],
                        "Icicle Inn Barkeeper": [
                                "I've heard there's a snow woman"
                        ],
                        "Junon Barkeeper": [
                                "I'd like to close down this shop",
                                "I'm sorry! It's all rented out today!"],
                        "Shinra Member's Barkeeper": [
                                "I'm sorry. I've decided to close this place down",
                                "Hey soldier-boy, aren't you still on duty?"],
                        "Cosmo Canyon Barkeeper": [
                                "How about our original cocktail",
                                "Welcome. How 'bout our original cocktail"],
                        "Kalm Barkeeper": ["They say the remaining members of AVALANCHE broke Shinra's resistance"],
                        "Wall Market Barkeeper": ["Yes? If you want to order, do it at the counter."],
                        "Bar del Sol Barkeeper": ["Welcome to Bar del Sol! Here's to tropical nights!"]


Final Fantasy 8
                "Aide": {
                        "Aide on the Right": [
                                "We have to evacuate! Please hurry to the pod!"
                        ],
                        "Aide on the Left": [
                                "It's much too dangerous now! We must leave Lunar Base at once!",
                                "Please sir, we must hurry!"
                        ]
                },
                "Garden Faculty": {
                        "Squall": ["\"Can you tell me what's going on?\""]
                },
                "Option": {




                        "Squall": ["Let's get in there!"]
                },
                "Security Guard": {
                        "Security Guard 1": [
                                "Can't believe you guys came back...",
                                "You!!! I said no talking!!! It's only been 3 days, you wimp!!! When I was young, I worked all day, all night...without sleep...!",
                                "No talking! How many times do I have to...",
                                "You keep working! That's what you get for your big mouth! That beast over there, you, too! No meal until your work is done!!!",
                                "He just won't get fed for a few days. If he wants to eat...he should work faster...",
                                "Come give me a hand. I can't handle the big guy alone."
                        ],
                        "Gate Guard": ["Alright, go ahead."]
                },
                "Boy": {
                        "Squall": [
                                "... Sis... I'm...all alone. But I'm doing my best... I'll be ok without you, Sis. I'll be able to take care of myself.",
                                "... Sis... I'm...all alone. But I'm doing my best... I'll be ok without you, Sis. I'll be able to take care of myself."
                        ],
                        "Seifer": [
                                "Cry-Ba-by-Ze-ll! Go back to bed!",
                                "CRY-BABY-ZE-ELL!!!",
                                "NAH-NA-NA-NA-NA-NAH!!!"
                        ]
                },
                "Girl": {
                        "Ellone": [
                                "Squall...so we meet again.",
                                "Squall!!! Squall! Quisty?",
                                "... Alright.",
                                "Uncle Laguna! There's someone here to see yoo.",
                                "He was wearin' funny clothes. He's tawking to Raine right now.",
                                "Yup. That's why I came over to get yoo. Uncle Laguna! Am I a good girl?"
                        ],
                        "Selphie": [
                                "Waaah!",
                                "There. Tee-hee, I'm fine. Sorry. I was kinda in a hurry. Oh yeah! Hey, did you just come from that class? Is......homeroom over?",
                                "There. Sorry. I was kinda in a hurry. Oh yeah! Hey, did you just come from that class? Is......homeroom over?",
                                "Woo... Oh, nooo... This place is soooo much bigger than my last Garden! Oh, hey, hey. I just transferred here. Do you think you could give me a quick tour of this Garden?",
                                "Whoo-hoo!",
                                "Oh, bummer. That's too bad. Well, see ya.",
                                "I have a question! How do you use this?",
                                "Yes, sir!",
                                "Yeah, I'm in the dorms, too!",
                                "Got it!",
                                "Hm? What's the matter?",
                                "I know! I know! It's the Garden Festival! It's going to be great! I'm planning to be on the committee. You wanna help out, too!?",
                                "What's the doctor's name?",
                                "(gulp)... Okay.",
                                "Yep, I remember that one.",
                                "Another question. What's the headmaster's name?",
                                "Got it! Heeey, um...are you taking today's SeeD exam?",
                                "Then maybe I'll see you again, later. I've already finished my training at my previous Garden. I'm taking the Seed exam today, too. Good luck to both of us, huh! Thanks a lot! (She walks off.)",
                                "Are you... Squad B? Wait a minute... You're the guy who showed me around, right!? Thanks! I don't so lost anymore. Oh yeah, I haven't told you my name yet. I'm...a messenger. Name's Selphie, from Squad A. The squad captain's Seifer, right? Where is he? (NOTE: If you didn't show her around, she begins at I'm...a messenger, obviously not recognizing Squall.)",
                                "Irvy, wanna play?",
                                "WAR!"
                        ],
                        "Rinoa": [
                                "You're the best looking guy here. Dance with me? Let me guess... You'll only dance with someone you like. Ok then... Look into my eyes... You're-going-to-like-me... You're-going-to- like-me... Did it work?",
                                "You'll be fine. Come on. I'm looking for someon. I can't be on the dance floor alone.",
                                "Hey... You're...! You know, from the party... So...does that mean... You're a SeeD!?",
                                "YEEESSSS! SeeD is here!",
                                "It's just that, I'm so happy! I've been sending requests to Garden forever, but nothing... I'm so glad I spoke to Cid directly!",
                                "You know Seifer?",
                                "Well, he's the one who introduced me to Cid. Cid is such a nice man. I really didn't think SeeD would come out to help a measly little group like us. But after explaining our situation to him, Cid gave the go ahead right away! Now that you guys are here, we'll be able to carry out all kinds of plans!",
                                "Yes?",
                                "Ok, let's go! Umm, Squall. Is 'he' here?",
                                "Seifer.",
                                "... Oh. Oh yeah, my name's..."
                        ]
                },
                "Guy": {
                        "Zone": [
                                "What are you DOING? How many times",
                "Arhhh! Just call 'em over!",
                                "Don't be so rude! C'mon, get up! Please excuse us... Come on, this way."
                        ],
                        "Adel Resistance Guy": [
                                "Ha ha ha... That's funny. I think that thing's 'Grrr... Grrr...' means 'thank you'. Know what? You're the first one to care about his well-being. These Moombas get worked to death for no reason. They only get half the food and sleep compared to us humans.",
                                "Sounds like Dr. Odine's up to something again upstairs.",
                                "You're such a...nice guy. Not many guys like you these days. You seem like you'd be a good candidate to be our leader.",
                                "That's right. A lot of us are dissatisfied with the way Adel's been ruling Esthar. We may be disorganied now... But someday we'll gather our forces to remove Adel from power. We're overthrowing the ruler of a country. A sorceress, far beyond our powers. A half-baked plan would never work. We're waiting for the right time, now... Most of us involved in the Adel resistance are specialists. It's easy to research ways to fight Adel, but... There's no one to lead the movement. That's our situation right now. We've been looking for someone like you... Someone who's strong and righteous...",
                                "It's ok... He's also an 'Adel Resistance' member. He's Dr. Odine's assistant. All the hot info about the lab comes from him.",
                                "Did something happen to the doctor? Or did Adel stop funding his lab?",
                                "You know her?",
                                "Wait a second! I still owe you!",
                                "Yes... That's right! It all sounds crazy, but... I like you! I really want you to be our leader..."
                        ]
                },
                "Man": {
                        "Kiros": ["Uhh, Laguna, are you sure this is the right way?"],
                        "Watts": [
                                "Oh, the forests of Timber sure have changed!",
                                "What are you talking about, sir? In the forest there are Ow... Nothing, yeah, it's nothing, sir.",
                                "OK, keep comin', keep comin'.",
                                "Ahhhhhh! Look outtttt!!!",
                "Hmmmmm... They... said the wrong... password... sir...",
                "...... Welcome to Timber...sir. Please follow me, sir.",
                                "Aaaaahhhh, sir... Give me a break...",
                                "Hey...!!? Don't leave me, sirrr!!!",
                                "Welcome to Timber, sir. Come with me, sir. Please, please, this way, sir!"
                        ],
                        "Man (Fisherman's Horizon)": [
                                "Here they come.",
                                "Do you understand?",
                                "You should go visit the mayor. His house is in the middle of the city."
                        ],
                        "Presidential Aide": [
                                "Sorceress Edea?",
                                "... Please explain what this is regarding.",
                                "... Ellone?",
                                "Please come with us.",
                                "We'll be arriving at the Presidential Palace shortly."
                        ],
                        "Man (Control Room)": [
                                "All capsules are in place. Conditions inside the capsules are normal.",
                                "Launch error correction, plus 2. Orbital correction, minus 1. Corrections complete.",
                                "Clear."
                        ],
                        "Ward": ["........."],
                        "Laguna": [
                                "Oh, sure. Hey there!",
                                "Been wanting to meet you guys! You guys are the ones who were inside my head, right? Ellone told me. It was like there were some kind of waves running through my head. They gave us so much power during battle. We thought they were some kind of faeries flying over us. So I'm Laguna, President Laguna Loire of Esthar. Pleased to meet ya. If we weren't in a state of emergency, I'd talk to you some more, but... Well, whatever. Let's talk. What do you want to know?"
                        ]
                },
                "Man 2": {
                        "Man 2 (Control Room)": ["Go!"],
                        "Familiar Face": [
                                "We've got to warn you before you go ashore. Do not engage in any type of armed conflict in the city. We do not tolerate belligerence here.",
                                "...... Welcome to Fishermans Horizon. We just call it FH.",
                                "Good. Looks like we understand each other. Man, this is a hell of a mes.",
                                "Nah, don't worry about it. What's important is that nobody got hurt. We love fixing stuff anyway. Kick back and enjoy your stay."
                        ]
                },


                                "Wedge is pissed!"
                        ],
                        "Laguna": [
                                "Odine only thought about his research. But, while researching under Adel's orders, he was still making many inventions...",
                                "It was a device to seal magic Sealing Facility. Maybe Adel can be defeated.",
                "That was easy. But...we were found out. So we gathered for a final battle to lure Adel. Adel appeared as we expected.",
                                "I knew she would go in right away if I mentioned Ellone.",
                                "Adel realized that Ellone was a hologram...... But... It was too late.",
                                "Adel was careless. She may be a sorceress, but after all, she was human. We succeeded... But... we couldn't keep such a dangerous sorceress around as a trophy. We had to do something... So...we decided to send her far, far away... Some place very far... Into outer space..."
                        ]
                },
                "Person": {
                        "Zell": [
                                "Tch! Too many! I'm outta here!"
                        ],
                        "Squall": [
                                "Huh? What's this? Who is it?"
                        ],
                        "Esthar Man": [
                                "Sorceress Rinoa. Hyne's descendant.",
                                "Thank you for understanding. Tell us when you're ready."
                        ]
                },
                "Voice": {
                        "Selphie": [
                                "I'm late, I'm late, I'm LATE!!!",
                                "There you are!"
                        ],
                        "Ellone": [
                                "Somebody help!!",
                                "... I can't disconnect.",
                                "Is it you, Squall?",
                                "'Connect' is just what I call it. It's when I use my special power. Oh, I know... I must be asleep. That's why I can't control it. I'm sorry, Squall. Just let me use your spirit for a little while longer."
                        ],
                        "Forest Fox Daughter": [
                                "What is this!? I have 2 small children in here. Don't do anything to frighten them!"
                        ],
                        "Warden": [
                                "What was that noise!?",
                                "There he is! Over there!!! Seize the escapee, dead or alive!!!"
                        ],
                        "Security Guard": [
                                "There they are! It's the escapees!"
                        ],
                        "Male SeeD": [
                                "Who's there!?"
                        ],
                        "Xu": [
                                "Squall!"
                        ],
                        "Cid": [
                                "Please! Listen to me!",
                                "Let go of me! I'm not finished!"
                        ],
                        "Raijin": [
                                "BWAHA HA HA HA!!! She's not alone!",
                                "Big sound, this way. It's probably them, ya know?"
                        ],
                        "Director": [
                                "Ok everyone! Take your positions!"
                        ],
                        "Odine": [
                                "Experiment! Experiment! Let's just do this! Bahh! This iz a failure!!!"
                        ],
                        "Esthar Airstation": [
                                "This is Esthar Airstation.",
                                "Ragnarok, do you read? Ragnarok, do you read!?",
                                "This is Airstation. Do you copy?",
                                "Whoa! Is this really the Ragnarok? You're in space, right?",
                                "Roger that! We can track you from here.",
                                "Ragnarok... It's been 17 years!",
                                "Leave it to us! You should have enough fuel. Enter your location into the atmospheric reentry program and you'll be ok. Once you enter the atmosphere, we can guide you down. You'll be just fine.",
                                "No sweat. We'll take this step by step. Are you in the pilot seat?",
                                "It's the one on the right. Go sit there.",
                                "See the touch panel in front of you?",
                                "The rest is easy. Just enter the following data.",
                                "WJHEIE/...",
                                "Then... 2872/HD-IEU",
                                "No errors?",
                                "Next, I'm sure you're ok, but there's something I need you to do. Turn off the gravity generator. This should save some fuel. Use the same touch panel to turn it off.",
                                "Congratulations. You're home free, Ragnarok. And... There's one more thing we need to tell you. From all of us at Ground Control, we wish you godspeed.",
                                "This is Airstation. Ragnarok, please respond.",
                                "We have some questions for you. We're collecing escape pods. We have a good idea of what happened. I hear no one from Lunar Base is on the Ragnarok. How many of you are there?",
                                "...... Your names?",
                                "And the other?",
                                "Rinoa? The sorceress!? She's on the ship!?",
                                "Respond, Ragnarok!",
                                "Respond, Ragnarok!",
                                "The sorceress will be seized upon arrival. Be sure to follow the crew's instructions.",
                                "Squall, do you copy? Is the sorceress listening, too?"
                        ]
                },
                "SeeD": {
                        "Male SeeD": [
                                "Whose side are you on!?",
                                "... Phew...good. Because I definitely don't want to fight you."
                        ],
                        "Squall": [
                                "I'm with the headmaster.",
                                "I'm with the Garden Master. At least that's what I told them, to make things easier for now.",
                "Huh?",
                                "Dream?",
                                "Is this a dream...?",
                                "Is this guy serious...?",
                                "Sad...",
                                "What's this guy thinking...?",
                                "... This is a dream... This is a dream...",
                                "This is too weird to be a dream...",
                                "... He talks to himself too much...",
                                "Whatever.",
                                "Is he really going?",
                                "He's already loosened up..."
                        ],
                        "Boy": [
                                "Yes, sir! Come on guys. Let's go."
                        ],
                        "Selphie": [
                                "Hmmm...?",
                                "Where am I?",
                                "Laguna's pretty cute!"
                        ],
                        "Zell": [
                                "What the...!?",
                                "?",
                                "What's goin' on!? W-What's happening to me!?"
                        ],
                        "Other Male SeeD": [
                                "Over here! She's one of the headmaster's SeeDs.",
                                "Heh heh heh. This should be interesting...",
                                "Aahhh!",
                                "Why you little...!"
                        ],
                        "Female SeeD (Garage)": [
                                "It was just a hologram. Pretty cool, huh? The headmaster isn't here. We're just here to make them believe that he's in here.",
                                "Basically, we're cutting them off and fighting them in small groups. Brilliant, huh? It wasn't our idea though.",
                                "She took charge immediately when this whole thing began."
                        ],
                        "Female SeeD": [
                                "Yes, sir! Come on guys. Let's go."
                        ]
                },
                "Woman": {
                        "Edea": [
                                "... Poor, poor boy...",
                                "Such a confused little boy. Are you going to step forward? Retreat? You have to decide.",
                                "The boy in you is telling you to come. The adult in you is telling you to back off. You can't make up your mind. You don't know the right answer. You want help, don't you? You want to be saved from this predicament.",
                                "Don't be ashamed to ask for help. Besides, you're only a little boy.",
                                "You don't want to be a boy anymore?",
                                "Come with me to a place of no return. Bid farewell to your childhood."
                        ],
                        "Forest Fox Leader": [
                                "Rinoa! I heard your base is in serious trouble. Come over to my place until things settle down.",
                                "I'll let you know if anything chanes. 'Til then, make yourself at home."
                        ],
                        "Forest Fox Daughter": [
                                "Upstairs... Hurry!",
                                "She'll be fine. The legend goes...that my mother took down many soldiers with her strength, cooking, and beauty."
                        ],
                        "Woman (Control Room)": [
                                "Boosters on standby. All systems normal.",
                                "Clear."
                        ]
                },
                "SeeD 2": {
                        "Male SeeD": [
                                "That's what I thought. Who's this Garden Master anyway?"
                        ],
                        "Other baddie SeeD": [
                                "The junior classmen are with her. Don't let them escape."
                        ],
                        "Male SeeD (Garage)": [
                                "If those bastards attack us all at once, we won't stand a chance, even if we are SeeDs.",
                                "Xu."
                "Receptionist": {
                        "Honeybee Receptionist": [
                                "Good evening.",
                                "Welcome to the heart and soul of Wall Market—the Honeybee Inn. Is there a honeyboy or girl whose company you desire?",
                                "Ahhh, the shining star of the Honeybee Inn. Now, are you the one who made the appointment, sir? Can I have your name?",
                                "I see... I'm terribly sorry, sir. An appointment is required, and the earliest available slot is three years from now.",
                                "Yes, well, regardless of the circumstances, you cannot meet him without an appointment.",
                                "It is rare, but Mr. Rhodea does occasionally extend invitations to individuals who catch his eye. Otherwise, I'm sorry, but there really is nothing that can be done.",
                                "I'm sorry that I couldn't be of more help to you.",
                                "Good evening. Welcome to the entertainment extravaganza that is the Honeybee Inn.",
                                "You must be Mr. Cloud. He's waiting for you.",
                                "I've been instructed to send you through without delay, sir. Please make your way to the stage in the back.",
                                "The one in the back, sir. Straight through those doors and down the hall.",
                                "The evening performance has ended. We hope to see you again very soon.",
                                "I must say, you were breathtaking.",
                                "My apologies, sir. We are not ready to open at this time.",
                                "Please come back later."
                        ],
                        "Hologram Receptionist": [
                                "You must be here for our grand tour. Visitors have access to floors 60, 61, 62, as well as floor 63. You will proceed in that order. By the exit to each floor, you will find a device that will allow you to update the keycard in your possession... thereby allowing you to access the next floor. And now begins your grand tour. Please enjoy the Shinra experience!"
                        ]
                },
                "Shinra Employee": {
                        "Shinra Employee (lift)": [
                                "Yeah...  Yeah, we're safe here. What about you, Mom? You okay? Good. That's a relief...  ... What? Oh, they gotta be kidding!",
                                "Yeah... Yeah, we're safe here. What about you, Mom? You okay? Good. That's a relief... ... What? Oh, they gotta be kidding!",
                                "... No, we haven't heard anything new yet. But they told us that Avalanche could attack again at any time. Just get somewhere safe, okay? Yeah. About that... "
                        ],
                        "Shinra Employee (glasses)": [
                                "Hm? Are you military? Cool, cool. I guess things have been keeping you pretty busy around here. Have you found the guys who did this yet?",
                                "Huh? Uhh... what about the mayor?"
                        ],
                        "Shinra Employee (table)": ["Please, just leave me alone."],
                        "Shinra Employee (phone)": [
                                "No, I'm gonna be here a while longer.",
                                "Hey, shhh! I'm on the phone!"
                        ],
                        "Shinra Employee (woman)": ["Can I help you?"],
                        "Shinra Employee (business)": [
                                "Depending on the board's decision, we may start two projects simultaneously: rebuilding the plate and the city. Members of the Urban Planning Division will likely take point on both. Director Tuesti has ordered teams to come up with three-, five-, and ten-year plans. Each team needs to come up with a detailed proposal and schedule. We're going to have to put a lot of man-hours into this, so we'll need to start ASAP. Does anyone have any questions at all? If not, then we'll wait for the director to return."
                        ],
                        "Shinra Employee (sim)": [
                                "You're gonna train in the sim at a time like this?",
                                "Hm? Are you looking for the mayor? He's not on this floor... "
                        ],
                        "Shinra Employee (tips)": [
                                "You're military, right? Can you give me any tips for doing better in the sim?",
                                "Mare? I need to be tough like a horse?"
                        ],
                        "Shinra Employee (vending)": [
                                "Yes, what is it?",
                                "Hm? You guys private security or something?",
                                "Are you allowed to be hanging out here on the clock?"
                        ]
                },
                "Shinra Employee (1)": {
                        "Shinra Employee (vent 1)": [
                                "I'm sure they're safe.",
                                "I heard that all the phone lines are down. It doesn't mean anything.",
                                "Pretty sure... "
                        ],
                        "Shinra Employee (train 1)": [
                                "What kind of maniacs would go so far as to bomb a reactor?",
                                "Really? Aren't they the terrorists who tried to kill the president?",
                                "\"Law-abiding\"? Really?",
                                "That's right!"
                        ]
                },
                "Shinra Employee (2)": {
                        "Shinra Employee (vent 2)": [
                                "But we live right by Sector 7 and I keep calling and calling, but I still can't get through.",
                                "... You sure?"
                        ],
                        "Shinra Middle Manager": [
                                "They've yet to announce it publicly, but I heard it was Avalanche's doing."
                        ],
                        "Shinra Employee (train 2)": [
                                "Is there nothing they won't do?",
                                "Don't antagonize him!",
                                "That is the Shinra creed!",
                                "We should go."
                        ]
                },
                "Shinra Employee (3)": {
                        "Shinra Employee (train 2)": [
                                "Is there nothing they won't do?",
                                "We should go."
                        ]
                },
                "Spectator (1)": {
                        "Spectator (male 1)": [
                                "\"Couple\"!? Get outta here with that lovey-dovey bullshit!",
                                "\"Couple\" my ass! The hell you two tryin' to pull!?"
                        ],


                        "Spectator (female)": [
                                "Cloud! Cloud! Over here! Look at them! They're so adorable!"
                        ]
                },
                "Spectator (2)": {
                        "Spectator (male 2)": [
                                "'Sup with the pole!? Gonna do a little dance for us, baby girl?",
                                "You assholes cost me a fortune!"
                        ],
                        "Spectator (male 3)": ["You're the man, Cloud!"]
                },
                "Spectator (3)": "Spectator (male 4)",
                "Gym Members": ["Jay", "Ronnie"],
                "Announcer": {
                        "Announcer (Train)": [
                                "Due to an explosion at Mako Reactor 1, an emergency schedule is now in effect. Your understanding and cooperation is appreciated."
                        ],
                        "Announcer (Anchor)": [
                                "Breaking news from Mako Reactor 5. Shinra has confirmed the reactor to be the target of the bomb threat issued by the terrorist group Avalanche. Members of the group were observed entering the facility, and security is currently sweeping it for explosive devices. We now go live to the scene...",
                                "President Shinra has issued a statement providing assurances that the terrorists will soon be brought to justice."
                        ],
                        "Announcer (Corneo Cup)": [
                                "Cloud and Aerith. Your match will begin shortly. Please make your way to the gate.",
                                "Contenders, please return to your waiting room.",
                                "Cloud and Aerith. Your match will begin shortly. Please make your way to the gate.",
                                "Cloud and Aerith. The final match will begin shortly. Please make your way to the gate."
                        ],
                        "Announcer (TV)": [
                                "Once again, relief supplies are currently being distributed in the lobby of the Shinra Building. Doctors are also stationed at the building's disaster relief center. If you are unable to reach the building on your own, please contact the nearest Shinra employee for assistance. Mayor Domino, in conjunction with President Shinra, has declared a state of emergency in Midgar. The administration have issued assurances that they are doing everything they can that they are doing everything in their power to provide aid to those most in need. As yet, no group has claimed responsibility for the attack, but security services are doing everything they can to identify those involved. If you have any information pertaining to the identity of the perpetrators, please contact your nearest Public Security officer or Security Headquarters."
                        ]
                },
                "Neighborhood Watch Member": {
                        "Neighborhood Watch Member (Not Found)": [
                                "We've got this area covered, don't worry!"
                        ],
                        "Neighborhood Watch Member (Male 1)": [
                                "We need water! Hurry! The fire's spreading!"
                        ],
                        "Neighborhood Watch Member (Male 2)": [
                                "If anyone needs any assistance, please let the watch know!",
                                "This underground passage'll take you to Wall Market."
                        ],
                        "Neighborhood Watch Member (Female)": [
                                "We can get through this! We just have to work together!",
                                "Get to Wall Market"
                        ],
                        "Neighborhood Watch Member (Male 3)": [
                                "It won't budge!",
                                "Hey, you guys might wanna turn around.",
                                "It's too dangerous.",
                                "Do what you gotta... "
                        ],
                        "Neighborhood Watch Member (Male 4)": [
                                "We've been getting tremors ever since last night. Roads are collapsing, and sinkholes are opening up all over."
                        ]
                },
                "Undercity Resident": {
                        "Undercity Resident (Posters)": [
                                "Hah. \"Mako is the lifeblood of the planet\"? The hell it is. Goddamn eco-warriors with their dumbass posters. I tear 'em down and they're back up inside of an hour. Like I've got nothing better to do... ",
                                "I mean, look at all that steelwork...  You're trying to tell me that's not progress?",
                                "I mean, look at all that steelwork... You're trying to tell me that's not progress?",
                                "What the—You okay, buddy?",
                                "What the— You okay, buddy?",
                                "Mako junkie, huh? Figures... "
                        ],
                        "Undercity Resident (Cat)": [
                                "Hey, what are you doing in there? Come on out.",
                                "I'm trying to get a cat to come out. It snatched one of my pastries and scurried in there. Will you be a dear and lend me a hand?",
                                "I've been seeing more and more cats around here lately.",
                                "And of course, they all come to",
                                "But I can't complain. They're so adorable.",
                                "Oh, for the love of... I am sick and tired of chasing this little guy around!\\"
                        ],
                        "Undercity Resident (Concerned)": [
                                "Oh! Didn't expect to see you here.",
                                "Oh, on your way home from the church?",
                                "Well, I'm glad you're okay. Did any debris hit the church?",
                                "That's something, at least—but you may not be so lucky next time!"
                        ],
                        "Undercity Resident (Community Center)": [
                                "This here's the Sector 5 community center.",
                                "Truth be told, it's really just a place for us old folks to sit here and chat.",
                                "Care to stay and keep us company a bit?"
                        ],
                        "Undercity Resident (Crash)": ["Look out—it's gonna crash!"],
                        "Undercity Resident (Woman)": ["Thank you."],
                        "Undercity Resident (tunnel entrance)": [
                                "The leader of the rat pack is the worst of 'em all. The loudest, most obnoxious squeaking... Johnny liked to mimic it until we told him to cut that shit out.",
                                "I'm guessing you're the merc who dealt with those damn rats? That wasn't me who put in the request, but as a resident of Culvert Street, I appreciate what you did."
                        ]
                },
                "Undercity Resident (1)": {
                        "Undercity Resident (Female 1)": [
                                "\"Somebody\" went and stole some blasting agent from a Shinra warehouse. So Public Security started asking questions, and you know how Johnny gets... "
                        ],
                        "Undercity Resident (Male 1)": [
                                "We poured so much of our blood and sweat into building that reactor, and now... "
                        ],
                        "Undercity Resident (Female 2)": [
                                "Why, hello! What is it? The Guardian Angel of the Slums? Such a mysterious figure. Always talked about, but never",
                                "Well, I could talk all day about the"
                        ],
                        "Undercity Resident (Male 2)": [
                                "Hey, everybody! The Angel left another calling card! She's gonna rip off Don Corneo!"
                        ],
                        "Undercity Resident (Older Man with Glasses)": [
                                "Hey. You hear 'bout that real narrow street just over there... ?",
                                "You bet I am. Found me a secret route in, one nobody don't know about. Only trouble is, it's filled with drunks 'n' garbage!"
                        ],
                        "Undercity Resident (Female 3)": ["Go, go, go!"],
                        "Undercity Resident (Male 3)": [
                                "Damn, man! Knew we couldn't trust Wutai to leave us alone.",
                                "After what they've done? What choice do we have?"
                        ],
                        "Undercity Resident (Server)": ["There."],
                        "Undercity Resident (Intermission male)": [
                                "To think this is where those bastards plotted their attacks. Right under our noses."
                        ]
                },
                "Undercity Resident (2)": {
                        "Undercity Resident (Male 4)": [
                                "It's because of the reactor bombing, I bet. I could be wrong...  But something tells me they're not gonna settle for just roughing him up this time.",
                                "It's because of the reactor bombing, I bet. I could be wrong... But something tells me they're not gonna settle for just roughing him up this time."
                        ],
                        "Undercity Resident (Older Female)": [
                                "I can't believe this is happening... "
                        ],
                        "Undercity Resident (Female 4)": [
                                "If we're going by rumors, then I've heard that it's actually a monster in disguise."
                        ],
                        "Undercity Resident (Female 5)": ["It's about damn time!"],
                        "Undercity Resident (Older Man)": [
                                "You're not still wasting your gil at the Honeybee Inn, are ya?"
                        ],
                        "Undercity Resident (Male 5)": ["Quit pushing!"],
                        "Undercity Resident (Male 6)": [
                                "It's the reactors. They want 'em, we got 'em."
                        ],
                        "Undercity Resident (Patron)": ["Thank you."],
                        "Undercity Resident (Intermission female)": [
                                "Too bad they made it out before the military could get here. Like chickens flying the coop... "
                        ]
                },
                "Undercity Resident (3)": {
                        "Undercity Resident (Male 7)": ["Hey, what the hell's going on!?"],
                        "Undercity Resident (Male 8)": [
                                "Don Corneo's no easy mark. I can't wait to see how this goes down!"
                        ],
                        "Undercity Resident (Female 6)": [
                                "Does this mean there'll be another war?"
                        ]
                },
                "Topside Resident": {
                        "Topside Resident (Male 1)": [
                                "The stairs are right there if you wanna try crossing the rubble.",
                                "If you really want to get to the station, you can always climb those stairs. Try picking your way across the rubble... "
                        ],
                        "Topside Resident (Male 2)": [
                                "The station? Well, take that fire escape. It'll put you right on the street.",
                                "Once you're on the street, you'll want to head for the plaza with the fountain. Station's not too far."
                        ],
                        "Topside Resident (Male 3)": [
                                "Hey. You know a way to get topside other than the train?",
                                "Figured as much. What a goddamn pain in the ass... "
                        ]
                },
                "Npc": {
                        "NPC (Male 1)": [
                                "Hey, let us through! How else're we supposed to get to Wall Market!?"
                        ],
                        "NPC (Female)": ["Oh god. Look out!"],
                        "NPC (Male 2)": [
                                "Whadda we do!?",
                                "I... I can't... ",
                                "Y-y-yessir!"
                        ],
                        "NPC (Male 3)": ["Excuse me, sir. Your tie?"],
                        "NPC (Male 4)": ["No more bombings! No more bombings!"]
                },
                "Staff": {
                        "Staff (4)": [
                                "Spectators, please enter from the right, and contenders from the left."
                        ],
                        "Staff (2)": [
                                "You lost? This is for spectators only.",
                                "Check-in for contenders is over there.",
                                "You better hurry."
                        ],
                        "Staff (1)": [
                                "What's this? You're here to compete? I hope you know you're cutting it really close. So—the two of you are a team?",
                                "All right, team it is. Head to the waiting area down below.",
                                "You need to take the elevator down. Don't keep 'em waiting.",
                                "Why didn't you tell me you guys were gonna kick so much ass!? Can I have your autographs?",
                                "I know that you can take on bigger and better opponents, champ! Keep on fighting!"
                        ],
                        "Staff (Cap)": [
                                "Hey, lovebirds! Over here!",
                                "You two—wait here until it's time.",
                                "Not bad, not bad.",
                                "You better make sure you rest up nice and good.",
                                "I've been working here a long time, but this has never happened before. Whew—gonna be one helluva match.",
                                "You've got some time before your next match. Get some rest.",
                                "You'd better be ready for this one."
                        ],
                        "Staff (Beasthandler)": ["No, please!"],
                        "Staff (5)": [
                                "It's the Angel of the Slums! She took the don's stuff! He's gonna be pissed!"
                        ],
                        "Staff (6)": [
                                "Excuse me, miss, but... are you sure you're in the right place?",
                                "This is an arena where men and monsters fight each other to near death—nowhere a delicate flower like you should be."
                        ],
                        "Staff (7)": [
                                "This check-in is for spectators only.",
                                "Contenders should take the elevator over to the left.",
                                "If you're in the tournament, you really oughta hurry."
                        ],
                        "Staff (8)": [
                                "This check-in is for spectators.",
                                "The entrance for contenders is over there.",
                                "Please go to the designated area."
                        ]
                },
                "???": {
                        "Marco": ["Reunion... Reunion... "],
                        "Sephiroth": ["Sleep. And dream the sweetest dreams... "],
                        "Train Announcer": [
                                "This train will be stopping at the Sector 7 slums... and is bound for the train graveyard. The train will depart shortly. Please stand clear of the closing doors."
                        ]
                },
                "Robed Man": {
                        "Robed Man (first)": [
                                "Re... un... ion.",
                                "Urh... Ah... ",
                                "Re... un... ion... "
                        ],
                        "Robed Man (wolves)": ["Uh... Urah..."],
                        "Robed Man (scrap boulevard)": [
                                "Je... no... va...",
                                "Je... no... va... "


Final Fantasy 10


                                "My, I certainly have a lot of visitors today, don't I?",
                                "Oh, dear. I don't think I was supposed to say that.",
                                "I was supposed to say, \"Don't walk over there!\""
                        ]


                        "Isaaru": [
                                "Muahahahaha!",
                                "You have done well to make it this far, sphere hunters. But you will not have the treasure you seek so easily.",
                                "If you want the treasure, you must speak the password!",
                                "Uh...yes, good. Uh, okay! So now tell me: What is the meaning of life?",
                                "Uh ... yes, good. Uh, okay! So now tell me: What is the meaning of life?",
                                "Is that your final answer?",
                                "Uh...fine.",
                                "Uh ... fine."
                        ],
                        "Calli": [
                                "I see. Sorry to bother you ...",
                                "You aren't Lady Yuna, be any chance?",
                                "I don't suppose you remember me, do you?"
                        ],
                        "Leblanc": [
                                "Boys!",
                                "Want in on this number? Then show me your moves!",
                                "Sorry, no time for an encore.",
                                "That's quite enough sniveling, boys.",
                                "Persistent, aren't you?",
                                "Didn't you girls ever learn to share?",
                                "Very well, it's yours.",
                                "But it won't be yours for long, loves!"
                        ],
                        "Shuyin": [
                                "You know, you're all I can count on to save Lenne.",
                                "You're wrong! If you'd stop attacking, there wouldn't be a war!",
                                "Someday ... your precious weapons will end up destroying you.",
                                "Can you hear me?",
                                "Ah, you can hear me.",
                                "Right here!",
                                "I finally found you."
                        ],
                        "Beclem": ["Fussing, you say?"]
                },
Who dares? Explain this intrusion!"
                        ],
                        "Thorne": [
                                "Who am I? Where am I? Why can't I remember anything? If only... If only I could remember my name!",
                                "I don't know... That doesn't seem to ring a bell. No, that's not it. That's not my name."
                        ],
                "Noel": ["Hey there, Noel. This might be hard to believe"],
                        "Serah! Is that you!? (It's the girl from before. She falls to the ground.)",
                                "(auto-talk) Alyssa Zaidelle. I'm an Academy intern. I heard you apprehended our two observers, so here I am...
"Male Hunter": [
                                "I just can't figure it out. Flan isn't the faeryl's meal of choice. So why was it causing the storm and swooping up the little beasties?",
                                "I wonder... Could the faeryl have just been that hungry?",
                                "Maybe this faeryl had a mutant gene.",
                                "Well, the storm is over. That's all that matters."
                        ],
                        "Female Hunter (Chocobo Stables)": [
                                "I've heard of what you've done. You're one of us now! In fact, you may be the bravest of us all! Here, take this chocobo. You deserve it. (auto-talk) I've bred these chocobos myself. You won't find any better."
                        ]
                },
                "Female Hunter": {
                        "Female Hunter (Chocobo Stables)": [
                                "(auto-talk) Chocobos find food to eat on their own, and they don't break down like machines. If you can learn to ignore the smell, they're the best way to travel the plains."
                        ],
                        "Female Hunter (Weather Device)": [
                                "There is a direct correlation between weather and monsters. I can teach you how to use the weather control device if you'd like.",
                                "This is a weather control device. It affects the weather within a certain distance. It is complicated, but do you want to know how it works?",
                                "If you want to learn how to use the machine, I'm your girl.",
                                "Come, I'll teach you how to operate the machine. Use the lever to shift the direction of the wind. That's the first step in changing the weather. The weather will change depending on which levers you use. There are four possible combinations-- and four possible weather conditions. There is a correlation between monsters and the weather. For example, if you make it rain, the monsters near watering holes will become more vicious. And rare monsters with extraordinary strength may appear. By controlling the weather, you can control what kind of monsters you'll run into. That's about it. If you forget how to work it, come talk to me again."
                        ]
                },
                "Male Guard": {
                        "Male Guard (Bresha)": [
                                "(auto-talk) I wish something would happen. This is one of my easiest missions ever. Nothing to report today. Things are as peaceful as ever."
"Female Resident": [
                                "The cats have been on edge ever since that rock fell out of the sky. I've never heard them sound so excited.",
                                "The kitties seem very pleased with themselves. I wonder if they found some food.",
                                "Sunbathing seems to be a favorite feline pastime.",
                                "Huh? A what? Have I seen any arti-what now?",
                                "Kitties just love to crawl inside boxes, don't they?",
                                "Looks like you found your kitty-cat! Isn't that great?",
                                "Your kitty's all sleek and brushed today!",
                                "I think 'Esmerelda' suits your cat much better."
                        ],
                        "Male Resident of Academia": [
                                "You have to stay away from the security bots! They're outta control and attacking humans left and right!",
                                "The Proto fal'Cie is turning everyone into monsters! That thing is supposed to protect us, not destroy us!",
                                "The defense system has gone haywire. It's targeting humans as hostile intruders!",
                                "I don't wanna stick around here. But someone has to warn people about those crazy killer machines out there!"
                        ]
                },
                "Woman 2": {
                        "Woman 3": ["(auto-talk) Leave this to me! Let's finish them off!"]
                },
                "Guard": {
                        "Guard 3": [
                                "So you managed to cut Atlas off from the source of his existence? It might be a good idea for us to team up with the scientists. - I have a feeling that more incidents like this paradox will occur. We need to be prepared for anything if we want to have a future. - Maybe we should see if the guys in the lab can create weapons inspired by the paradox. - Even if we could forget the tragedy of Cocoon, the army's job is never done.",
                "So you managed to cut Atlas off from the source of his existence?"
                        ],
                        "Female Guard": [
                                "The thing is... the scratch marks suggested they were inflicted by people. - The group that stayed on Cocoon and the ones who moved to Pulse aren't on great terms. If things escalate, we might have another war. - People fighting against each other in a time like this is just plain stupid. But we can't seem to stop it from happening. - Everyone seems to be supporting the Academy. Probably because their inventions helped make our lives more convenient. But it'll only take one catalyst for the people to revolt against the Academy.",
                                "Whoa, hold up. This is a restricted area. There's an important investigation going on here.",
                                "The area up ahead is being excavated in the hope of finding something significant.",
                                "If you've not part of the excavation team, I'm afraid I can't let you through. At least, not until the area's been combed thoroughly.",
                                "If you want to pass through, you'll need the Academy's consent.",
                "The thing is... the scratch marks suggested they were inflicted by people.",
                "The group that stayed on Cocoon and the ones who moved to Pulse aren't on great terms.",
                "People fighting against each other in a time like this is just plain stupid.",
                "Everyone seems to be supporting the Academy."
"Roaming Male NORA Member 2": [
                                "That's right. Gadot and the others went to check out the meteorite.",
                                "Gadot and the others went to examine the meteorite.",
                                "The meteorite fell over there--in that area near Cocoon."
                        ],
                        "Female NORA Member": [
                                "You're worried about them, too? Don't worry--the kids and Lebreau are safe and sound. They're inside that building by the shore.",
                                "Serah, I didn't know you were such a worrywart.",
                                "A moogle that moves? That's so cute.",
                                "Lebreau's fine. The kids are taking care of her, so you have nothing to worry about.",
                                "We'll keep patrolling the area.",
                                "You guys make a really good team, you know that? I bet Snow would be jealous if he found out!",
                                "It takes courage and strength to protect other people.",
                                "Speaking of Snow, where is he, anyway? It's been a heck of a long time since he left.",
                                "I can't believe he hasn't even dropped you a line, you know what I'm saying? I know it must be hard on you, with you guys just having moved in together.",
                                "You're tougher than you look. You remind me a lot of your sister."
                        ],
                        "Male NORA Member Guarding Exit": [
                                "Now that you mention it, there is another route along the shore",
                                "Some great waves out there, but I'm on duty all day.",
                                "When it comes to surf and seafood, Pulse rocks!",
                                "You get monster waves this time of year, bigger than anything on Cocoon. You risk your life riding those babies!",
                                "Yuj's is coming out with me next time I go surfing. I can't wait!",
                                "The houses along the shore are built to withstand even harsh storms."
                        ],
                        "Roaming Male NORA Member 3": [
                                "We used to live in a place called Bodhum. That's where we created NORA. But we had to find another place to live after that incident three years back. We left Cocoon and created this town.",
                                "He's strong like an ox, but he's no leader. Here in town, Lebreau's actually in command. She is the head of NORA, after all. At least, for now.",
                                "She's a grade school teacher. A really strict one, too.",
                                "Well, to be perfectly honest, not much at all. We did send out a warning to Cocoon, though. Their new provisional government might send help.",
                                "Yeah, I've heard that, too. Apparently, the provisional government is taking over what used to be the job of the fal'Cie. And us NORA members are taking over what should be the job of the government. I guess we have to rely on ourselves.",
                                "I hear there are still lots of people holed up on Cocoon. But I doubt they would come to visit this small backwater town.",
                                "They're constructing an elevator that can transport us to Cocoon, but it'll take years to finish.",
                                "It's been three years since the Sanctum and PSICOM were destroyed, and the provisional government was created. I have to ask; how's it still 'provisional' after three years?",
                                "Scientists and engineers are in charge of this provisional government. Instead of the fal'Cie, people and technology have to keep Cocoon running now.",
                                "I hear people are arguing about whether to restore Cocoon, or relocate residents to Pulse. I'm perfectly happy right here in the boonies!"
"Roaming Female NORA Member": [
                                "That's a strange question all right. I wish I could help you, but I've been pretty busy with security duty. Frankly, these days lots of things seem out of the ordinary!",
                                "Well, we can't ask them to fight off the monsters themselves.",
                                "Things are almost back to normal on Cocoon, thanks to the provisional government the army created.",
                                "Bodhum was destroyed three years ago, and now there's nothing left of it. It's ironic to think now, but I would have died if it hadn't been for the Purge.",
                                "My younger sister lives near Cocoon. She says she's too scared to live around here 'cause of the monsters.",
                                "I hear they're constructing a giant elevator to reach Cocoon. The problem is, the airships just can't handle the traffic.",
                                "I thought moogles were make believe animals from fairy tales. The longer I live here, the less I seem to know about Gran Pulse.",
                "I thought moogles were make-believe animals from fairy tales."
                        ],
                        "Man guarding Barrier": [
                                "I'm sorry, but we can't let you through. We have a dangerous situation on our hands.",
                                "Artefact? Is that some kind of food?",
                                "We can't let you through. Too dangerous!",
                                "No can do. Gadot's orders!",
                                "You've seen the monsters, right? Be careful!",
                                "Hold on. Why are you so interested in that gate thing?"
                        ]
                },
                "Researcher": {
                        "Female Researcher 1": [
                                "Exactly. It's as if it sprung up here from an entirely different dimension.",
                                "To be honest, Atlas scares me. It's not a fal'Cie, or a monster, or like anything made by humans.",
                                "Some say that Atlas is actually a weapon, but I don't know. There aren't any records of a weapon of that stature.",
                                "Mysterious light emitting structures... ... and the paradox I think they're both connected with the appearance of Atlas.",
                "Mysterious light-emitting structures"
                        ],
                        "Female Researcher 2": [
                                "Good to hear! You know, you need to be able to handle anything in this day and age. (auto-talk) The people at the Academy are so picky. A lot of people even complain about how good their lives used to be. Can you believe it? Hmph. There are trainees who refuse to eat vegetables. It's a shame--the vegetables of Gran Pulse are much tastier than the ones grown on Cocoon. They use the Gran Elevator to transport vegetables from Gran Pulse. That elevator is amazing. Now, getting back and forth from Gran Pulse is a snap!",
                                "Don't worry I think you two did the right thing. It was too advanced for us to control anyway. It's a very dangerous technology.",
                                "Personally, I don't want to rely on crystals. For all we know, that could lead to the fal'Cie ending up in charge again. And nobody wants that.",
                                "The Academy was created by the provisional government. Its mandate was clear: To replace the fal'Cie with science and modern technology.",
                                "The Academy strives for self sufficiency. The policy is strongly supported by the provisional government they don't want a repeat of what happened here on Cocoon.",
                                "Don't worry I think you two did the right thing. It was too advanced for us to control anyway.",
                "Don't worry--I think you two did the right thing.",
                "The Academy was created by the provisional government.",
                "The Academy strives for self-sufficiency."
"Female Researcher 3": [
                                "Is that right? You're such a cute little boy!",
                                "Piggy Kitty? What a perfect name!"
                        ],
                        "Male Researcher 1": [
                                "We can also try and figure out its spatial manipulation mechanism. I wonder if the paradox has anything to do with it. (auto-talk) An unexplainable phenomenon, a contradiction--that's the paradox. I wonder what kind of world gave birth to Atlas. I doubt a very peaceful one. Is Atlas unstable, or is its main physical component flawed in some fashion? There's also the possibility it uses an advanced form of camouflage. We scientists don't even know how to wield a weapon, but I guess we'll have to learn how to take care of ourselves someday.",
                                "I can't stop shaking! My head is numb, my nose is stuffed up--I feel weird. (auto-talk) I guess walking around in the rain wasn't the best idea. My head is starting to pound. On top of that, I think I have a fever. I don't want to get anyone else sick. I suppose I should go home."
                        ],
                        "Male Researcher 2": [
                                "And because of what happened to Cocoon, you gave up your studies? I'm sorry that happened.",
                                "Well, that's good to hear. Resolve can sometimes be a powerful weapon.",
                                "Now that things seem to have calmed down, I should get back to my research.",
                                "I'm hoping my expertise will help us figure out what kind world is beyond the gate.",
                                "You know Alyssa, that trainee? She's as sharp as a tack, and a genius with numbers.",
                                "We here at the Academy have a great responsibility. With the fal'Cie gone, people rely on us to protect humanity.",
                                "We need to develop our technology in order to maintain Cocoon.",
                                "I can tell you this: the Academy respects ability and potential."
                        ],
                        "Male Researcher 3": [
                                "We always have room for another keen young mind with ambition and potential. With our budget increase, there are a lot of new research projects in the works.",
                                "A project to rebuild Cocoon will be starting up any day soon now. But before we can start, we can use all the bright minds we can get.",
                                "We're all one big happy family here at the Academy. I have to tell you, though: there's a lot of competition for bright students for our various projects.",
                                "Young people complain about being misunderstood by adults, but we can tell which kids have promise and that's who we want.",
                "Young people complain about being misunderstood by adults"
                        ],
                        "Male Researcher": [
                                "Yaschas Massif, 10 AF, sir.",
                                "I must say, this is the first time anyone asked me what year it was. I don't suppose you happen to be time travelers?",
                                "Ah, yes. I almost forgot. I'm supposed to hand out this map. Take it, it's free.",
                                "Keep your wits about you. There's no telling what kind of monsters the paradox has let loose here.",
                                "Yes. The great fal'Cie Fenrir blocked out the sun. It was predicted he would appear two hundred years from now. Which means...",
                                "Ah, you've done your homework, I see. Yes, we've found multiple gates in the site.",
                                "Some areas may still be sealed off. We've yet to determine if those sections are safe.",
                                "We have no idea what caused the aberration.",
                                "There are several paradox theories floating around.",
                                "It's terrifying to consider what the fal'Cie's purpose might be.",
                                "The ancient recordings state that Fenrir appears only once every few centuries.",
                                "According to the calculations, Fenrir shouldn't have appeared for another two hundred years."
"Female Researcher on guard": [
                                "I'm very sorry. Only persons on official Academy business are permitted beyond this point.",
                                "S-security!",
                                "We didn't feel in danger... ... since the army was always there to protect us. But we were too confident; we got too careless.",
                                "Our success at predicting your unconventional arrival has proven our theory to be true.",
                                "The director can't wait to meet you. He's been holding his breath in anticipation!",
                                "The phasing activity of the gate is consistent with that of the gate found within the Bresha Ruins five years ago. That's when the director spoke up and said he knew for certain that the gates are linked through time."
                        ],
                        "Female Researcher near orb": [
                                "Welcome to the fallen city of Paddra, site of ancient ruins. We don't get a lot of visitors around these parts. Although I'm not very surprised, since there's not much to see or do here. There was a powerful paradox effect in these ruins. A group of Academy staff who were investigating the area just disappeared without trace. That's why so many sections have been closed off.",
                                "I think it's safe to assume that the red orbs are part of the paradox effect.",
                                "It looks like the spacetime surrounding the orbs is distorted.",
                                "Did you come to visit the ruins? You may want to rethink your plans. The paradox effect has grown out of hand and a large number of people have simply disappeared. Do you see the red sphere-like objects floating everywhere? The Academy is currently attempting to analyze their properties. That said, the area is not restricted. So feel free to explore, if you dare.",
                                "Here at the Academy, we've had our hands full dealing with the paradox.",
                                "We still have no clue as to what those orbs are. Don't let your guard down.",
                                "The longer I stay on Pulse, the stranger this planet gets."
                        ],
                        "Other Female Researcher": [
                                "A paradox is the existence or materialization of something that shouldn't be.",
                                "The orbs don't appear to be sentient.",
                                "A substance that's not animal, vegetable, or mineral. Fascinating.",
                                "I wonder what will happen to Pulse in the future."
                        ]
                },
                "Female Researcher": {
                        "Female Researcher 3": [
                                "What a unique little pet! Well-behaved, too! Is he a monster of some sort?"
                        ],
                        "Female Researcher on guard": [
                                "I'm terribly sorry about how I treated you before. It was very rude. Especially since I hear you two are the time travelers the director was waiting for."
                        ]
                },
                "Patrolling Man 1": {
                        "Patrolling Man 5": [
                                "(auto-talk) Can you imagine what would happen if Cocoon was hit by a meteorite? Cocoon looks amazing at night. Leave this area to us. Go hide somewhere safe. Stay safe. Don't want to upset Snow! Phew! Friendlies... What's the deal with rocks falling from the sky? That kid Maqui's up ahead. Hey there! Hey, bro."
                        ]
                "Patrolling Man 2": {
                        "Patrolling Man 1": [
                                "(auto-talk) Cocoon makes a good landmark. Oh man, Yuj really drives us hard... The path is way too dangerous!"
                        ]
                },
                "Patrolling Man 3": {
                        "Patrolling Man 5": [
                                "(auto-talk) A monster!? ... Oh, it's just you. The army's got nothin' on NORA! Come out, come out, wherever you are! Snow, we need you here!"
                        ]
                },
                "Patrolling Man": {
                        "Patrolling Man 1": [
                                "(auto-talk) I didn't know monsters like that existed on Pulse. I wonder if they get a kick out of attacking us humans. So those sentry bots are just junk, huh?"
                        ],
                        "Patrolling Man 3": [
                                "(auto-talk) Don't trust your eyes. Let's head to the meteorite. Do we really have to go investigate? I think it might be time to evacuate. Agh! ... Oh, it's just you."
                        ]
                },
                "Patrolling Man 5": {
                        "Patrolling Man 2": [
                                "You don't think... Could the people on Cocoon have dropped that rock? You know, Maqui might know something about it. Serah, you came too? It's dangerous. I see the shelters here are still intact. Stay in contact, now. Yuj and Maqui went ahead. Hey there! If the monsters want to come and get me, now's their shot!"
                        ]
        "Paddra Nsu-Yeul": [
                                "You are God's savior. You lead souls to the new world.",
                                "The encounter is ordained. You have been led to the fountainhead once the Chaos flows. Here you will meet the servant of fate, adorned with feathers of white. The Angel of Valhalla.",
                                "Through the Chaos my message was born. I spoke, so that you might know the future. And so that you would learn of my wish, and make it true. Only the savior can. It must be you.",
                                "Save the soul that cannot rest. Please, save Caius. He has lost his undying heart. He no longer wants to live. He yearns to die... But he cannot. The Chaos binds him, and forces life upon him.",
                                "As the savior, you have to help him. Bring him salvation and release his soul.",
                                "Savior, your fate awaits you ahead.",
                                "Savior. Can you hear my voice?",
                                "I could see everything. I could see what you had to do here. So I called out from within the Chaos. To all the people, past and future. I spoke to every person who would listen to me.",
                                "I only pointed the way to your destiny. You and he have always been bound, by the strands of fate. Since long before you came to the Wildlands. See. He was always yours. Your steed, your knight, your champion."
                        ],
                        "Yeul who gave Caius the heart of chaos": [
                                "It is the first time for me. The Yeul you met before was a different Yeul.",
                                "Yes. One of the countless Yeuls.",
                                "I had a wish of my own, though.",
                                "I want...to stay."
                        ],
                        "Yeul who wishes to save Caius": [
                                "He suffers because of us. Savior, can you save him?",
                                "The truth...lies ahead."
                        ],
                        "Another Yeul": [
                                "I am the one to blame for this crisis",
                                "This is the power of Chaos. This is the darkness contained within our souls."
                        ],
                        "Yeul who loves Noel": [
                                "I made a promise. I told him that we'd meet again.",
                                "Noel, you did the right thing. Your soul will come to me. We'll meet again. Sooner than you think. I promise."
                        ]
                },
                "???": {
                        "Snow": [
                                "The legends had told of her coming... Banisher of darkness, bringer of light, redeemer of souls. She'd come at the end of days... to guide our souls to salvation."
                        ],


                        ],
                        "Woman in Green": ["The area's locked. What do I do now?"],
                        "Cultist on Phone": [
                                "Show that you are one of us.",
                                "The rites are beginning. Make haste."
                        ],
                        "Bystander": ["We see her! It's the savior!"],
                        "Paddra Nsu-Yeul": [
                                "The encounter is ordained. You have been led to the fountainhead whence the chaos flows. Here you will meet the servant of fate, adorned with feathers of white. The Angel of Valhalla."
                        ],
                        "Man in Jagd Woods": [
                                "Hey, show time! Everyone drop what you're doing, and eat, that's all."
                        ],
                        "Woman by road in Grasslands": [
                                "Farmers have to get their harvest in quickly. Otherwise they might end up losing their whole crop!"
                        ],
                        "Mog": [
                                "What's all the noise for, kupo!? Some of us enjoy a little peace!"
                        ]
                },
                "Adventuring Essentials": {
                        "Adventuring Essentials (Wildlands)": ["Right..."]
                },
                "Announcer": {
                        "Train Announcement": [
                                "The Yusnaan train is now arriving. Luxerion North station.",
                                "The train bound for the Wildlands...",
                                "This stop The Wildlands. Passengers for the Dead Dudes and Luxerion South Station. Please board now. Thank you.",
                                "This stop, Dead Dunes.",
                                "All trains are running on schedule. Thank you."
                        ]
                },
                "Bandit": {
                        "Female Bandit": ["Will we never find the clavis?"],
                        "Young Female Bandit": ["What are we going to do?"],
                        "Male Bandit": ["Where's the treasure at?"],
                        "Male Bandit 2": ["Whoa, whoa, whoa."]
                },
                "Goddess's Disciple": {
                        "Goddess's Disciple on Phone": [
                                "In the forest of darkness Chaos holds sway. To the goddess of death, these numbers I say. Seven, eight, nine, one."
                        ],
                        "Cultist on Phone": ["Welcome, child. You may enter."]
                },
                "Guide": {
                        "Man on Street": [
                                "The guides in Yusnaan get paid by the tourists and shop owners. Not a bad deal."
                        ]
                },
                "Hunter": {
                        "Mounted Woman": [
                                "Well, it's true what they say. You know, about riders resembling their steeds."
                        ]
                },
                "Innkeeper": {
                        "Luxerion Innkeeper": [
                                "I'm terribly sorry, I've been ordered not to...",
                                "\"The evil savior will die at the hands of the Shadow Hunter.\" It's certainly an arresting statement."
                        ],
                        "Jagd Village Innkeeper": [
                                "Welcome, traveler! Care to rest a while?",
                                "Hey, how's that bird doing? Of course, I speak of the white chocobo that you're caring for! Perhaps you would like to feed him some of this fortifying milk. The truth is one of my regulars wanted it, but I just can't stand by seeing that poor creature suffer. You take it. Visit any time.",
                                "I checked the lodgings"
                        ]
                },
                "Resident": {
                        "Man in Jagd Village": [
                                "What a fine chocobo! Look at the legs on him! The Angel of Valhalla",
                                "What a fine chocobo! Look at the legs on him!"
                        ],
                        "Girl in the Grasslands": [
                "I'm going to visit one of my friends in another village."
                        ],
                        "Man near Sarala": ["Cole, he owns this field here."],
                        "Woman in Luxerion": ["It's time. We're saved!"],
                        "Rusted Gate Man": ["Monsters!"],
                        "Pilgrims Causeway Man": ["It's dangerous! Run!"],
                        "Idol Ave Man": ["Time for work. Please do away with the Chaos!"],
                        "Relieved Man": ["Thank goodness, the trains are running."],
                        "Central Ave Woman": ["No."],
                        "Man in Fountain Square": [
                                "Of course, the Chaos scares me, but there's nothing I can do about it, so I just accept it."
                        ],
                        "Man in Pleasure Alley": [
                                "If only I could dream and never wake up."
                        ],
                        "Little Boy": ["Wow! I bet she's strong!"],
                        "Woman in Jagd Woods": ["I bet he'd love to try some chocobull."],
                        "Woman in Jagd Village": [
                                "That chocobo runs with such grace and power."
                        ],
                        "Man on Sacred Path": [
                                "When I look up beyond the rocky crags and view the temple, I feel that much closer to my goddess."
                        ],
                        "Resident Moogle": ["I'm hungry, kupo!"],
                        "Worshippers": [
                                "Don't... Lead us on to the new world of salvation! Take us to the land of promise!"
                        ]
                },
                "Resident 1": {
                        "Man at North Platform": ["It's getting a little chilly."],
                        "Resident in tan blazer": [
                                "I always said those people would cause trouble. And I was right. Every night, I can see them. Those weirdos in their white cloaks, sneaking around the streets. Whenever I see white, I think \"heretic\"! If there's one thing I know, that wicked Shadow Hunter, he's the ringleader of the heretics! Those fanatics are growing bold. Nowadays, there's always a gang of them in the plaza in front of the station. It's as if they are meeting to go someplace else. Speaking of which, it's usually around this time they start to show up."
                        ],
                        "Man by Victim": [
                                "It's another girl.",
                                "I bet it's the heretics' doing."
                        ],
                        "Man at Machine": ["Stupid machine."],
                        "Sentry by Twin Gates": [
                                "Those heretics believe in some 'prophecy of the goddess,' from what I hear. They think it's sacred."
                        ],
                        "Woman in Cathedral": [
                                "The heretics are creatures of the dark. There's no place for them in the city of light."
                        ],
                        "Woman by Tour Guide": ["That's weird..."],
                        "Man on Steps": [
                                "There was a time when people fought over the fal'Cie's production."
                        ],
                        "Young Woman in Yusnaan": [
                                "If you can't even see the play, then there's really no point in coming to Yusnaan!"
                        ],
                        "Woman Announcement": ["Morning from a Wildlands Resident."],
                        "Man in Jagd Village": [
                                "Frankly, I'm worried about that white chocobo. He's in such a terrible state."
                        ]
                },
                "Resident 2": {
                        "Woman in Green": ["I want to leave."],
                        "Woman by Victim": ["How awful..."],
                        "Man at Station": ["Has the savior come to help us?"],
                        "Cultist": [
                                "The day is nigh, when God will send his mighty servant to save the souls of only those who believe in the almighty deity!"
                        ],
                        "Woman on Steps": ["Isn't he one of the dancers in the play?"],
                        "Young Woman in Yusnaan": [
                                "If you don't want to be single, I suggest you figure something out."
                        ],
                        "Other Man in Jagd Village": ["Yeah."],
                        "Man in Restaurant District": ["Such a nice day."],
                        "Young Woman in Cactuar Plaza": ["Good morning!"],
                        "Boy in Jagd Village": ["Angels can fly, right?"]
                },
                "Resident 3": {
                        "Pilgrims Passage Woman": [
                                "What I fear isn't the heretics, but people losing their faith."
                        ],
                        "Beseeching Man": ["Please do away with the Chaos!"],
                        "2nd Ave Sentry": [
                                "Though that was centuries ago... To think he would appear again now."
                        ]
                },
                "Seller": {
                        "Central Ave Female Seller": [
                                "I wonder if there's a way to stop the world's destruction?"
                        ],
                        "Shop Owner": [
                                "Only the finest quality here"
                        ],
                        "Director Sarzhak": [
                                "Next! Look, lively people! We've got a show to put on!"
                        ]
                },
                "Sentry": {
                        "Idol Ave Sentry": ["Still awaiting orders!"],
                        "Sentry that confronts Lightning": ["What are you doing?"],
                        "Snow's Sentry": ["Sire!"],
                        "Cactuar Plaza Sentry": [
                                "Hey! You there!",
                                "I know your face. You're the one I've seen on the posters.",
                                "Sh-shut up! I don't need you to tell me how to do my job, you damn criminal!"
                        ],
                        "Fountain Square Sentry": [
                                "It's her"
                        ],
                        "Cathedral Plaza Sentry": [
                                "I have strict orders not to let anyone in, no matter who they might be! I am to use any means to strike down anyone would interfere with the sacred rites!",
                                "Do your worst. Look around us, would you? It's the end of the world and we're all dead anyway. Or didn't you notice? We've been waiting hundreds of years for this day to come! We will gladly give up our lives for God! For God almighty!"
                        ]
                },
                "Sentry 1": {
                        "Cathedral Plaza Sentry": [
                                "No one will defy us, after all of this."
                        ]
                },
                "Sentry 2": {
                        "Priest": ["So the Children of Etro have finally been eradicated."]
                },
                "Woman": {
                        "Woman in Cathedral": ["No, please, take me!"],
                        "Woman in Pink": ["I always end up eating too much."],
                        "Excited Woman": [
                                "It's Gordon Gourmet! He's visiting the Banquet of the Lord!"
                        ]
                },
                "Woman 1": {
                        "Woman in Jagd Village": [
                                "Your chocobo looks more powerful than any of our steeds."
                        ]
                },
                "Woman 2": {
                        "Woman in Jagd Village": [
                                "That chocobo runs with such grace and power."
                        "Henchman": ["You. Boy. You will come with us."],
                                                        "Preparations, and the Holy Land",
                                "Chapter 17 through Midlight to Dawn"
                        ],
                        "War-chief Supinelu": [
                                "They are wayfarers. They bring no harm. I saw them cross the Ozmone Plain. They are warriors of great distinction. The fiends of the plains troubled them not at all."
                        ],
                        "Al-Cid": [
                                "I do not suppose this is something you might... reconsider?",
                                "My little emperor-in-waiting. You called and I have come.",
                                "I am but one of very, very many. Try as I might, I could not stop this war alone ... thus I came seeking Larsa's assistance."
                        ],
                        "Jules": [
                                "Well, well, well ... there's a sight for sore eyes. Didn't think I'd be seeing you again. Not here.",
                                "A pirate would do well to smile. Wouldn't want to sour his reputation.",
                                "Having a spot of trouble, are we?"
                        ],
                        "Reddas": [
                                "Ah. My apologies. You bear not the stench of Cid's lackies.",
                                "Yes, a valuable man, one I'd sooner not lose. Yet he knows too much.",
                                "Cid. You know deifacted nethicite brought down the Leviathan! How can you persist in this folly?",
                                "Lend him not your ears, m'lady. He means to use you.",
                                "Mayhaps you think me remiss! The Lady Ashe of Dalmasca?",
                                "The sky pirate Reddas, at your employ."
                        ],
                        "Ondore": [
                                "The Imperial Senate, powerless to resist House Solidor's brutal Purge, was dissolved.",
                                "Vayne Solidor reigned supreme over the Empire.",
                                "Though this Upheaval shook the Imperial Bastion to its Foundation, these developments were, to say the least, welcomed by her Military.",
                                "The authoritarian Rule of the Judges, in tandem with the impending Threat of Rozarrian Invasion, served to foster Camaraderie among its Ranks.",
                                "For our part, the Resistance mustered Strength in the Border-Skies, making ready for the Task ahead.",
                                "A War to decide the Doom of Ivalice would soon be upon us."
                        ],
                        "Occuria": [
                                "Fear not, Princess of Dalmasca. We Occuria have chosen you, and you alone.",
                                "Ashelia B'nargin Dalmasca. We see your heart desires power, and power most holy shall we grant. Seek you the Sun-cryst, slumb'ring star. In tower on distant shore it dreams. The mother of all nethicite, the source of its unending power. The Dynast-King, his fallow shards, coarse trinkets cut from Sun-cryst's light.",
                                "In times that are long passed away, we thought to save this Ivalice ... and chose Raithwall the Dynast-King. He took the sword and cut the Cryst. Three shards he took from its gilt grasp, and so became the Dynast-King. His words and deeds run through your veins.",
                                "The treaty held with kings of old is but a mem'ry, cold and still. With you, we now shall treat anew, to cut a run for hist'ry's flow.",
                                "Now take this sword, this Treaty-Blade. Occurian seal, mark of your worth. Cut deep the Cryst and seize your shards. Wield Dynast-King's power! Destroy Venat!",
                                "Venat is a heretic!",
                                "The nethicite is ours to give, to chosen bearer or to none. The heretic trespassed and set the rose of knowledge in Man's hand. With imitations they profane, it is anathema to us. We give you now the Stone and task. Administer judgment: destroy them all!",
                                "The humes ever skew hist'ry's weave. With haste they move through too-short lives. Driven to err by base desires, t'ward waste and wasting on they run. Undying, we Occuria light the path for wayward sons of Man. Oft did we pass judgment on them so that Ivalice might endure. Eternal, we are hist'ry's stewards, to set the course and keep it true. The chosen is our hand, our fist, to let live some and crush the rest. Princess, you have been chosen. Take revenge against those who stole your kingdom. Fulfil your role as savior.",
                                "Attain to your birthright!"
                        ]


                },
                "Man": {
                        "Balthier": [
                                "Quite a performance.",
                                "I play the leading man, who else?",
                                "Fran, the magicite.",
                                "And then when I take it from you, it will be mine.",
                                "Exit stage right.",
                                "I like it better that way.",
                                "The Ifrit, eh? Impeccable timing. If I didn't know any better, I'd say they were waiting all along.",
                                "Stop running!",
                                "End of the line! You have something that belongs to me.",
                                "Fran! Let's move!",
                                "Off with you!",
                                "Keep this up and I will!",
                                "What's going on, Fran?",
                                "I don't have time for this.",
                                "Bah, forget it. Even if we could fly ... the Ifrit's playing with fire, and I'd rather not get burned. We'll go the old-fashioned way.",
                                "Not many viera where you come from, thief",
                                "?",
                                "Well, Fran is special ... in that she'd deign to partner with a hume."
                        ]
                },
                "Rabanastran (man in brown and green shorts)": {
                        "Rabanastran (man in green and brown shorts North End)": [
                                "The Consul's been quite busy with his civic projects, you know. Perhaps Lowtown's fortunes are on the up?"
                        ]
                },
                "Rabanastran (man in green and brown shorts)": {
                        "Rabanastran (man in green and brown shorts North End)": [
                                "They're locking the city down tight. Which suits me fine. I'm happy to stay right here. Don't believe me? Head down to the gates and see for yourself!",
                                "You've heard of the Rozarrian Empire? You don't suppose they'd take advantage of the Emperor's death to attack us, do you?"
                        ],
                        "Rabanastran (man in green and brown shorts Westgate)": [
                                "Times I wish I could just ride off on a chocobo and never come back. Too bad the poor things tire so easily, eh?"
                        ],
                        "Rabanastran (man in green and brown shorts South Sprawl)": [
                                "The shops around here have had trouble keeping goods stocked since the war. These days, the only merchant with much of anything is over in the courtyard.",
                                "I can't find work, so I was thinkin' about joining the Resistance. Thing is, I'm not sure I've got what it takes to be a warrior. No money, no work, no courage ... I don't have much goin' for myself, do I?"
                        ]
                },
                "Rabanastran (man in green shorts)": {
                        "Rabanastran (man in green shorts East End)": [
                                "Migelo? Feting the new consul? Migelo this, Migelo that ... it's all I ever hear these days."
                        ],
                        "Rabanastran (man in green and brown shorts South Sprawl)": [
                                "After seeing the Imperials capture those thieves, it hit home how easily any of us in Lowtown could be rounded up and taken off, if they wanted to."
                        ]
                },
                "Henchman": {
                        "Gijuk": ["It's Balthier, my brother."],
                        "Bwagi": [
                                "My brother! A message come from Rabanastre! The Strahl, she's set sail! She leaves straight for the Skycity of Bhujerba!",
                                "A tender beatin' ... My specialty!"
                        ]
                },
                "Rabanastran (woman in green and pink)": {
                        "Rabanastran (woman in green and pink NE)": [
                                "I hear there's a resistance group planning something against the Imperials. But if you ask me, things aren't so bad the way they are now."
                        ],
                        "Rabanastran (woman in green and pink EE)": [
                                "At last, we can finally go back to Lowtown. I've had enough of these Imperials and their meaningless rules! I'm sorry, I've let my tongue get the better of me."
                        ]
                },
                "Rabanastran (woman in pink and tan)": {
                        "Rabanastran (woman in pink and tan EE)": [
                                "You can cut the tension with a knife out here on the streets today. Guards at every corner ... I can hardly stand it. If anyone asks, I said nothing. Nothing. Understood?"
                        ],
                        "Rabanastran (woman in pink and tan MB)": [
                                "The Imperials give us leave to manage the bazaar with some measure of freedom. It's in their own interest, really. Without places like this for people to let off steam, tension would boil over onto the streets."
                        ]
                },
                "Rabanastran (woman in pink headscarf)": {
                        "Rabanastran (woman in pink and tan MB)": [
                                "The Bazaar is one of the few places in Rabanastre where people can go to let off steam. Not literally, of course."
                        ]
                },
                "Rabanastran (woman in pink top and headscarf)": {
                        "Rabanastran (woman in pink and tan MB)": [
                                "The Bazaar is one of the few places in Rabanastre where people can go to let off steam. Can almost forget the constant watch we're under ... Almost."
                        ],
                        "Rabanastran (woman in pink headscarf)": [
                                "They lost contact with the Imperial Fleet out west of Rabanastre. They wouldn't have flown into jagd, would they? That would be suicide.",
                                "Wouldn't you know it, the one day I have questions about something I'm looking to buy, Migelo isn't here. I'll just have to make do."
                        ]
                },
                "????": {
                        "Larsa": [
                                "You're on your way to the mines?",
                                "Then please, allow me to accompany you. I've an errand to attend to there.",
                                "What errand? I might ask the same of you.",
                                "Excellent.",
                                "For us both.",
                                "Oh, I – I'm Lamont."
                        ],
                        "Vayne": [
                                "Seize the insurgent!",
                                "Well, so much for peaceful negotiations.",
                                "But the war is over, my dear captain. You have lost. Dalmasca is the property of the Empire, now. And to think, we intended to let you keep some of your sovereignty, out of respect. But now you've gone and ruined that. Haven't you, Captain?",
                                "And the people of Dalmasca will hate you for it. Take the Captain away."
                        ],
                        "Vossler": [
                                "Then go now and hurry the others. By nightfall, we must ensure all our men are in place."
                        ],
                        "Ashe": ["Who would be next?", "Thank you.", "Amalia."],
                        "Ba'Gamnan": [
                                "What does that philanderer think he's doing? I was to kill Balthier, not those addle-pated Imperials!",
                                "What, you couldn't hear? I merely said that the lot of you are incompetent fools. If you've the sky pirate in your hands, where is he?"
                        ],
                        "Vaan": [
                                "I brought you some of those flowers you like: Galbana lilies. Remember? You always said how they smelled nice, and how pretty they were. Remember?",
                                "The King – Did you? Were you really a part of it?",
                                "Even if – Even if you were – Captain Basch must have tricked you into it!"
                        ],
                        "Gabranth": ["That's enough, Ba'Gamnan."]
                },
                "Basch": {
                        "Gabranth": [
                                "The King intended all along to sell Dalmasca to the Empire. His Majesty was a traitor.",
                                "We'll never surrender to you! We are not cattle to be sold by a traitor-king!",
                                "We will never bow to you!"
                        ]
                },
                "Adventurer": {
                        "Weather Eye": [
                                "I was headed to Giza Plains to take a look at those dark crystals they have ... all fine and good, until a group of monsters decided to take a look at me! Lucky that nomad village down south is as close as it is. I ducked in there and just barely managed to give those monsters the slip.",
                                "Sure, the Moogling is handy, but without some old-fashioned walkin', I'll never lose weight. Hard to say no to a free ride, though ...",
                                "Just takes one look at the sky to tell if it's the Rains or the Dry down in Giza. Never hurts to take a look afore settin' out. The lay of the land, even the very beasts change from the Rains to the Dry, y'know.",
                                "Just takes one look at the sky to tell if it's the Rains or the Dry down in Giza. I think I've got an eye for tellin' when the change will be comin', too. Matter of fact, you can call me \"Weather Eye\" from now on. I like the sound of that, yes ..."
                        ]
                },
                "Attendant": {
                        "Ondore's Attendant": [
                                "We shall make ready to repel their attacks. Counter-air, track them as though they were the enemy.",
                                "With the stone or without, our Resistance should prove an even match for the Imperial army. These weeks of training have honed our edge."
                        ],
                        "Aerodrome Attendant": [
                                "Lately, every other departing airship seems to be weighed down with the latest in construction technology from the Empire. But don't be alarmed. We take great care to load everything with passenger safety in mind. There's no danger at all. Have a good flight!"
                        ]
                },
                "Judge": {
                        "Gabranth": [
                                "The Emperor is willing to overlook race for his more talented servants. However, those that do not show respect will receive none in kind. You travel freely through our lands because the Emperor wills it. Am I correct?",
                                "Where is the Captain?",
                                "This does not concern you, bounty hunter.",
                                "You have grown very thin, Basch. Less than a shadow. Less than a man. Sentenced to death and yet you live. Why?",
                                "Is that all?",
                                "We've caught a leader of the insurgence. She is being brought from Rabanastre. The woman Amalia. Who could that be? Such a faithful hound to cling to a fallen kingdom.",
                                "Throwing it away? As you threw away our homeland?",
                                "The insurgents in Rabanastre operate alone at present. However, should they garner external support, the situation could worsen. We have found the counter-Imperial elements in Bhujerba to be conspicuously well-funded. No doubt Marquis Ondore is behind this. Ondore must be reined in.",
                                "He will die by my hand.",
                                "I have confirmed he receives funds from Lord Vayne. His agency in the fall of Nabudis is also certain ... yet, with Judge Zecht, who led the assault, missing ... the truth remains difficult to ascertain.",
                                "My Lord."
                        ],
                        "Judge Ghis": [
                                "You will forgive me for asking, but you are diverting the purest of the magicite –",
                                "You wear your saddle well.",
                                "Then you prefer the whip? Stubbornness will see not only you broken, Excellency, but Bhujerba as well.",
                                "I see you've been out walking without the company of your cortege ... Lord Larsa.",
                                "We caught her wandering out of the mines. You must take care with such undesirables about.",
                                "Silence!",
                                "That was unexpected."
                        ]
                },
                "Researcher": {
                        "Male Researcher": [
                                "Did our orders not specify that we return the stone for testing?"
                        ],
                        "Female Researcher": [
                                "Our equipment here is limited, so we'll be using the ship's drive to make our assessment. Once we've connected the Stone, the reaction should be easily measured –",
                                "Sixty-eight hundred, sixty-nine hundred, seven thousand! This must be deifacted nethicite! The count still climbs!",
                                "What is this? Something's wrong!"
                        ]
                },
                "Researcher 2": {
                        "Male Researcher": [
                                "It's inflected! She'll reach critical in three hundred! Cascade failure!"
                        ]
                },
                "Viera": {
                        "Fran": [
                                "Well then, I'll be taking that.",
                                "The gods do not smile on us.",
                                "I don't know, it's not heeding me!",
                                "What happened? Our hover didn't just drop – it disappeared."
                        ],
                        "Wandering Viera": [
                                "I must thank you for helping me to find my soul mate. My journey has reached its end. I would like you to take my provisions, as a token of my gratitude. I have no more need of them. Thank you.",
                                "If this is not my true soul mate, he will become my sixty-third almost soul mate. But surely he will be the one ... surely."
                        ]
                },
                "Viera Wayfarer": {
                        "Viera Wayfarer (Giza)": [
                                "Much calm and peace fills these plains. It is a special place, loved and treasured. Though unlike the quiet Wood I knew, in me still it wakes Her memory ... so bittersweet.",
                                "How long has it been since I left the Wood? Already Her voice is faint ... when I can hear it at all. At first it frightened me, but I have grown accustomed to it. Can you still hear the voice of the Wood?",
                                "People fear power, until they have it. Then it consumes them. How can they let this happen? Power not shown respect returns none in kind, only ruin.",
                                "The world shudders. It fears the wounds that are to come. Do you feel it, too?"
                        ]
                },
                "Layabout": {
                        "Craftsmoogle (green-pommed moogle at left)": [
                                "Oh, we're here working on the gate down the road, kupo! But right now, it's break time, kupo! Kupo? The Boss wants us back on the job? That moogle-driver, kupo! (sigh) Well, let's get back and be done with this ..."
                        ],
                        "Craftsmoogle (red-pommed moogle,on the right)": [
                                "What? No, we're working on the gate up ahead ... Okay, we're not actually working on it right now, if you must be literal about it. The Boss wants us, kupo? Break's over, kupo? Ah well ..."
                        ],
                        "Craftsmoogle (white-pommed moogle on bottom right)": [
                                "Kupo? We're here working on the gate up ahead. Well, right now we're on break, actually. Eh? The Boss wants us, kupo? That's no good, he's scary when he gets mad! Okay, break time's over!",
                                "That's all of us, kupo! Let's get working!",
                                "Come with us to the gate, kupo?",
                                "Then let's be off, kupo!",
                                "Bye-bye, kupo!"
                        ],
                        "Craftsmoogle (yellow-pommed moogle at left)": [
                                "We're here working on the gate up ahead. Except, right now we're taking a break, actually. What? The Boss wants us? Uh oh, kupo! We'd better go! He's ugly when he gets mad, kupo!"
                        ],
                        "Layabout (South Sprawl)": [
                                "Yeah, I'm takin' my time, but I'm almost there anyway. Filo's just up ahead. I'll win easy.",
                                "I'm tired of training. I hate lettin' Filo down, but I don't really care about winning anyway. So I'll just wait here until I lose ... But what if everyone decides to give up?",
                                "Bein' a sky pirate? Nothin' to it! You just fly all over the place in your airship. So how come there aren't as many real sky pirates anymore? These days, most of them what say they're sky pirates are just a buncha thieves. Not me. I'm gonna be a real sky pirate! Yarr!",
                                "Filo's always fussin' at me to be more like Kytes ... Hmph. I say everybody oughta be himself.",
                                "So there was this weird man, and this group a tough-lookin' guys came up and took him off somewhere. Smells pretty funny to me."
                        ]
                },
                "Bhujerban (moogle with green pom-pom)": {
                        "Bhujerban (moogle with green pom-pom Aerodrome)": [
                                "Bhujerba values our mooglecraft, and values us the same, kupo! I hope Bhujerba stays the way it is ... No wars for this moogle, kupo!"
                        ]
                },
                "Itinerant Hand (black bangaa)": {
                        "Itinerant Hand (black bangaa with tattoos)": [
                                "Fun to check out the stalls between jobs."
                        ],
                        "Itinerant Hand (black bangaa at window)": [
                                "I'm headed to that port in the east, where the sky pirates gather. Once I've earned me a 'ship, I'll be a sky pirate, free to go where I will!"
                        ]
                },
                "Rabanastran (blindfolded tan bangaa)": {
                        "Rabanastran (blindfolded tan bangaa SG)": [
                                "I was just passion' through the west gate, and I saw somethin' I ain't never seen before: a feathered tumbleweed rollin' through as the gates closed. Don't see cockatrices visitin' the city much, that's for sure! But, I suppose if it doesn't cause any trouble, people won't pay it much mind.",
                                "You traveled afoot to Bur-Omisace? Passing through Golmore must've set a fright about you. What's that? You've walked to Archades, too? Sounds as though you're on a walking tour of Ivalice! Where you heading next?"
                        ],
                        "Rabanastran (blindfolded tan bangaa EE)": [
                                "The Rozarrian Empire stirs, Marquis Ondore plots ... There are more rumors than even I can keep straight. I wish I knew what it all meant. I'm not so much scared as ... worried. Whatever happens, it's always the small folk who get caught up in the middle."
                        ],
                        "Rabanastran (blindfolded tan bangaa NE)": [
                                "Vayne is a talented man. I hope that in his absence from Rabanastre he applies those talents toward peaceful ends ..."
                        ]
                },
                "Rabanastran (tan bangaa)": {
                        "Rabanastran (blindfolded tan bangaa EE)": [
                                "I was just down at Migelo's Sundries ... that Migelo's comin' and goin' so, I'm half afraid he's gonna wear the door off its hinges!"
                        ],
                        "Rabanastran (blindfolded tan bangaa NE)": [
                                "The consul may change, but how long will it be before we see change on the streets? Though I'll admit, the guards seem more mannerly now."
                        ],
                        "Rabanastran (tan bangaa in green vest)": [
                                "If you'd been following the Empire's moves recently, you'd be worried for Rabanastre, too. 'Twixt them and the Resistance, who can say what's a-brewin'...",
                                "There hasn't been any official proclamation yet, but apparently some insurgents staged an assault on the palace the night of the fete. You could hear the commotion all over the city. It quieted down soon enough, though. Maybe it was just part of the night's entertainment?"
                        ]
                },
                "Rabanastran (tan blindfolded bangaa)": {
                        "Rabanastran (blindfolded tan bangaa EE)": [
                                "The Imperial fleet en route to Rabanastre simply ... vanished into thin air. What could have happened?"
                        ],
                        "Rabanastran (blindfolded tan bangaa SG)": [
                                "The continent of Kerwon lies to the south of Giza, much of it covered in wilderness, and even jagd. It's not as though it's never been explored, but who can say what strange things you might find there?"
                        ]
                },


                },
                "Look-alike": {
                        "Look-alike (lower level)": [
                                "Seen a swindler about? Not that you'd know if you did: he's a master of disguise. Why, he dressed like me and walked off with my earnings!"
                        ],
                        "Look-alike (upper level)": [
                                "Seen a swindler about? Not that you'd know if you did: he's a master of disguise. Why, he dressed like me and walked off with my earnings! If I don't find him quick, I'm ruined! Finished! End of story! Ah, I can't go back to scratchin' for gil in the old town. How'd he imitate me so well?"
                        ]
                },
                "Senior Researcher": {
                        "Senior Researcher (Draklor)": [
                                "What's going on? There were soldiers in the laboratory ... Has there been an intruder? The bulkheads are functioning ... were safe. The bulkheads, red and blue, are activated alternately. When one opens, the other locks. No one who wasn't intimately familiar with the workings of the laboratory could get through. The guards will find them soon enough. So then, who might you be?"
                        ]
                },
                "Chief Steward": {
                        "Chief Steward Chezelle": [
                                "Ladies and gentleman, allow me to welcome you aboard on behalf of the East Ivalice Company. Your captain for our voyage is Mr. Ranton, with Mr. Nicol his first officer. I am Chief Steward Chezelle. We have cabins available, should you wish to retire for the remainder of our journey. And please, let me know if I may be of any service.",
                                "Ladies and gentlemen, allow me to welcome you aboard on behalf of the East Ivalice Company. Your captain for our voyage is Mr. Erbna, with Mr. Ardinne his first officer. I am Chief Steward Chezelle. We have cabins available, should you wish to retire for the remainder of our journey. And please, let me know if I may be of any service."
                        ],
                        "Chief Steward Binastre": [
                                "Ladies and gentleman, allow me to welcome you aboard on behalf of the East Ivalice Company. Your captain for our voyage is Mr. Ranton, with Mr. Nicol his first officer. I am Chief Steward Binastre. We have cabins available, should you wish to retire for the remainder of our journey. And please, let me know if I may be of any service.",
                                "How may I help you, sir? We have cabins available, if you would like to rest until we make port. Would you like me to show you to a cabin?",
                                "Let's see ... Vaan, was it? You'll be staying in cabin A-31. I hope you've enjoyed your journey.",
                                "Don't hesitate to ask again, should you change your mind."
                        ],
                        "Chief Steward Ann": [
                                "Rande! He's a passenger! Mind your tongue! I apologize for my ... companion's behavior. We have cabins available, if you would like to rest until we make port. Would you like me to show you to a cabin?",
                                "No one. Truly. Just a gentleman – and I use the term loosely – who does not know when enough is enough.",
                                "Forget my own mother? The mother who raised my sisters single-handedly after my father died in the war? I would never marry a person like you. How many times must I tell you?",
                                "You and your brothers are among the most vulgar men I've ever met. And I've known many vulgars! Using your father to find out where we work! Speaking of work, I'd better get back to it. If you would kindly take your leave, I've a proper passenger to attend to.",
                                "What manner of game?",
                                "What of it?",
                                "Absurd! You expect a perfect stranger to willingly go from airship to airship delivering this message of yours!?",
                                "I'm sorry you've gotten involved in this, sir ... If you do see my sisters on the other airships, perhaps you could show them a letter for me? They're chief stewards, like myself.",
                                "Don't worry about me, sir. My sisters and I are up to the challenge presented by the notorious brothers of House Lirschell. Well, he's distracted me from my duties long enough, I should say. Where were we ... ? Ah, yes! Would you like me to show you to a cabin?",
                                "Let's see ... Vaan, was it? You'll be staying in cabin",
                                ". I hope you've enjoyed your journey.",
                                "Don't hesitate to ask again, should you change your mind."
                        ],
                        "Chief Steward Liddy": [
                                "How may I help you, sir? We have cabins available, if you would like to rest until we make port. Would you like me to show you to a cabin?",
                                "From Ann? My sister Ann!? Well, uh, I'm Liddy. Pleased to make your acquaintance. Now ... you said you had a letter for me? Hmm. Flowers this year, eh? I suppose that would make Mother happy. But what manner of glamour has you out delivering letters for my sister? Well, no matter. Here, the letter back. You've still some sisters to go. Good luck."
                        ],


                        ]
                },
                "Chocobo Wrangler": {
                        "Moomer": [
                                "(You 'eard me. I'm a chocobo, innit. Jus' 'cos a bloke's onna short side, it don't make 'im no bloomin' cockatrice! People these days, eh! No respect! An' they're even worse back in Giza! Can't do nuffink! Go fer a stroll an' they stick yer back inna pen! I put up wiv it fer years, but when I saw me chance, I was off! An' I ain't never goin' back! Not that they'll find me out 'ere o' course ... )"
                        ]
                },
                "Fisherman": {
                        "Archadian Fisherman": [
                                "What can ye catch here? Well, I'm not sure what ye'd be able t' catch. Me? I'm hopin' t' catch ma supper!",
                                "What can ye catch here? Well, lots o' things, I s'pose. Depends on what yer fishin' for. Me? I'm fishin' fer ma past ... fer the fire o' ma youth. What? No, ye cannae feed a family with the past. But ye can keep yerself warm at night."
                        ]
                },
                "Imperial": {
                        "Imperial (standing beside his friend)": [
                                "Oh, cruel Fates! I have to help my friend ... If I only had a potion!",
                                "T-Traveler ... have you a potion on you? My friend is badly wounded ... I fear that, untreated ... he'll die. Please, just one potion ...",
                                "Thank you, thank you! I'm in your debt ...",
                                "Thanks to you, my friend's life is saved. We are in your debt, sir. We fled here from the Henne Mines. We were attacked, you see ... It was all we could do to make it this far. We'll rest here until my friend's wounds have had a chance to heal. If you like, we could lend you the use of a chocobo until then. There's a lot of terrain around here which can't be accessed without a chocobo. You let me know when you need one."
                        ],
                        "Imperial (at the eastgate)": [
                                "You there! Let's see some papers, boy. No public passage on account of the Lord Consul's parade.",
                                "The Lord Consul is a great man ... and not one to take offense at such trifling ... matters ...",
                                "Move along, boy. Wouldn't do to keep the Consul waiting. Right! Gates are closed after this!"
                        ],
                        "Imperial (Outside Eastgate)": [
                                "The watch inside notified me. Foodstuffs for the banquet wasn't it? Well, do you need to pass?",
                                "I don't see any foodstuffs on you. Still have work to do, eh? Well, be about your business. Go on now.",
                                "Right. No foodstuffs on you yet. Leastwise none I can make out. Best hurry about your business. Gates'll close and stay closed 'fore long.",
                                "Stand back there. Back!",
                                "Open the gate!",
                                "All right, out of the way!",
                                "What of it? This here is a pedigreed parader, boy. Costs tens of thousands of gil, this one did. A prettier price than a hundred of you provincials would fetch. Keep your distance! We don't want the chocobos stinking of peasant.",
                                "You, let these carts through and then we close this gate as ordered.",
                                "My mail's choked with this sand."
                        ],
                        "Imperial (pacing around near entrance)": [
                                "Headed for the aerodrome? Begging your pardon, but we're expecting a fleet arrival today. No civilian use of the facility allowed."
                        ],
                        "Imperial (North End)": [
                                "The ceremony's over. You're free to move about Lowtown and pass through the city gates.",
                                "Lord Vayne is very particular about the rules he sets out. He's ordered us to treat you commoners proper, like. Of course I would, orders or no!",
                                "I'm on watch. If you have no business here, kindly leave me be. I've enough on my mind with Lord Vayne breathing down our necks ...",
                                "Leave me be, would you? I'm trying to focus on my duties. I've no time for idle gossip."
                        ],
                        "Imperial (Southern Plaza)": [
                                "There were rumors about a group of insurgents plottin' an attack, but we kept the peace good 'n' proper. The city gates, the stairs to Lowtown – you can come 'n' go as you like now.",
                                "That commotion with the thieves in the palace on the night of the Lord Consul's fete shook people up a fair bit. All's well now, though. The watch did for them, sure enough.",
                                "Saw a squad of guards headin' in through the south gate. Soaked to the skin, they were. Must be the Rains down in Giza.",
                                "Hard to believe I've been here two years already. Heh. I remember when the Rains were a big deal. Now it's just same-old, same-old.",
                                "Seems like Rozarria's on the move. Only no one's quite sure what they're up to. I just hope the higher ups don't do nothin' foolish. One wrong move and all Dalmasca could go up in flames, and I'd just as soon not see that happen."
                        ],
                        "Imperial (Guarding Archades Entrance)": [
                                "Entering the capital? You have credentials?",
                                "Hm? Well I don't see any! We can't just throw open our gates to you vulgars, you know. Especially not the lying kind! Away with you!",
                                "No credentials!? We can't just throw open our gates to any old riff-raff who happen to be passing by. Be off with you, commoner!",
                                "Bah, we see nothing but brawling and loutishness down here. If you start something, don't expect to be let off lightly!"
                        ],
                        "Imperial (speaking to two men and bangaa)": [
                                "Here to work on the fortress? A word to the wise: complain overmuch and you'll be thrown in the dungeons, from which there can be no escape! ... Huh? You heard of someone escaping? Bah! Nonsense!",
                                "We pay good wages, and still they complain! Can't anyone work in silence anymore?"
                        ],
                        "Imperial (Dealing with Cockatrice 1)": [
                                "(huff) Whod have thought something so (pant) big and ungainly could move so (wheeze) fast!?",
                                "(pant) (wheeze)"
                        ],
                        "Imperial (Dealing with Cockatrice 2)": [
                                "If only there was a way to communicate with cockatrices ... maybe I could talk him down.",
                                "Y-You can speak Cockatrice!?"
                        ],
                        "Imperial (Dealing with Cockatrice 3)": [
                                "Clear the area! This cockatrice is dangerous! I'd tackle it myself, but it's big as well as nasty!",
                                "Whew. Seems to have gone."
                        ]
                },
                "Kiltias": {
                        "Kiltias (Walk of Mind)": [
                                "We had begun to worry at your long absence. Return with all haste to holy Mt. Bur-Omisace. We, of course, must remain here.",
                                "The same fleet we saw descend upon Bur-Omisace not long before you emerged from the shrine. I pray for our brothers on the mountain ...",
                                "The same fleet we saw descend upon Mt. Bur-Omisace not long before you emerged from the shrine. I pray for our brothers and sisters on the mountain...",
                                "I fear a dreadful thing has happened. Yet in your eyes I see a glimmer of hope. May the graceful and merciful Father watch over you. Faram."
                        ],
                        "Kiltias (Sandstrewn Pass)": [
                                "The Kiltias today have no strength to withstand the violence of the world below. The Archadian attack may well have been a divine test."
                        ]
                },
                "Lhusu Miner": {
                        "Lhusu Miner (man sitting cross-legged on crate)": [
                                "Haa ... What will become of us ..."
                        ],
                        "Lhusu Miner (Bhorta)": [
                                "I have seen the Marquis running along like a dog to these Judges. Bhorta cares for this not. How can we leave Bhujerba in the hands of such a man?"
                        ],
                        "Lhusu Miner (man in green and brown shorts up against wall)": [
                                "They say the Lhusu Mines are silent today. People talk of important men from the Empire come to see the mines. The ones in armor, perhaps?",
                                "The Lhusu Mines have been quiet for a time. I hear much talk of raksas running wild, and broken machinery. No talk of the truth."
                        ]


                                "Hanta ... Very well. Go show off your bottle. See if I care."
                        ],
                        "Ondore": ["The Death of Ld. Rasler",
                                "The Air of Hope that had",
                                "At this Time, two Great",
                                "The Invasion of the Kingdom",
                                "With Lord Rasler's beloved",
                                "The Fall of the Fortress at",
                                "A Counter-Attack was mounted",
                                "Indeed, their Defeat was to",
                                "Soon thereafter, Archadia came",
                                "Lord Raminas, King of Dalmasca",
                                "The King had scarce departed His",
                                "The Treaty would be signed with",
                                "Pretenses of Peace left by the",
                                "To make Resistance would serve",
                                "\"Sons and Daughters of Dalmasca",
                                "\"Prayer, too, for the noble",
                                "\"Know also that Capt. Basch",
                                "\"They who at this late Hour",
                                "Dalmasca's Surrender without",
                                "The Dreadnought Leviathan is",
                                "As Word of the Events in the",
                                "My true Motive: to bring the",
                                "By this Time, Lady Ashe had",
                                "Had she chosen to go before",
                                "In such Circumstance as the",
                                "Though Archadia had lost her"
                        ],
                        "The Moogles Eight": ["Kupo-podee"],
                        "Bhujerban (man sitting on rail speaking to other man and Imperial)": ["Haa ... He is drunken beyond words.", "Haa. That is a shame."],
                        "Shop Clerk (Rithil's)": ["Haa! I'm bored! So bored!"],
                        "Bhujerban (woman talking to seated man)": ["Haa ... Now I'm quite"],
                        "Lhusu Miner (black bangaa yelling at moogle up on ledge)": ["Yi yi yiii!", "Haa ... Nirvana! If I died at this", "Kah? You are swine!"],
                        "Bhujerban (woman in pink, green, and tan at edge)": ["Haa. A shame."]
                },
                "Lhusu Parivir": {
                        "Lhusu Parivir (Lhusu Square)": [
                                "We are parivir, sworn to defend those who work the mines. Many raksas dwell in Lhusu! Very, very dangerous place. Thus are we needed. You have the look of someone new. You would do well to hire us, should you wish to enter Lhusu. Of course, not today, for the mines are closed.",
                                "The paling erected within the mines to keep raksas at bay has fallen, and so mining has stopped. Why do they not fix it, I wonder? Haa ...",
                                "Should war come upon us, we have only to go into the mines. Yes, there are raksas within, but, to be honest, an army frightens me more, bhadra."
                        ]
                },
                "Merchant": {
                        "Merchant (Aerodrome)": [
                                "I'm headed to Bhujerba to lay in some new goods, but I plan to see the sights while I'm there. They have guides at every corner and byroad.",
                                "It's the strangest thing ... I was in Bhujerba not long back, and there was someone running around pretending to be Captain Basch. Whatever for?",
                                "When I'd heard what had happened, I left for Bur-Omisace as soon as I could. What I saw there left me speechless ... What could the Empire possibly hope to gain by making an enemy of the Light?"
                        ],
                        "Peddler": [
                                "Sir, you haven't paid, and –",
                                "On second thought, please, sir. Take it. It is a gift."
                        ],
                        "Merchant (Jajim Bazaar)": [
                                "We first opened shop in Nabudis ... And lost all but our lives when the Empire turned our home to dust. Good thing we'd the sense to evacuate! Me and my bangaa associate, he managed to get the shop open again. Now we do good business, selling to the Empire!",
                                "Nestled as it is on the border of Nabradia and Dalmasca, Nalbina was always bustling with trade between the two. These days it's more fortress than town. At least it's still here, though. Our home of Nabudis was wiped from the land, leaving naught but a necrohol of fiends behind."
                        ],
                        "Box Merchant": [
                                "What? Don't know what kind of shop I'm running? Well ... truth be told, I'm a little unclear on that myself. I sell ... boxes? Yeah. Boxes. I pick up boxes no one needs, and I sell 'em. What? It's a living. (snort)",
                                "Sold a box to an Imperial the other day. Heard he took it with 'im on some Leviathingy ... then that up and disappeared! Wonder where it went to.",
                                "My boxes're selling like popular boxes to them Imperials! Wait, you think they're usin' em to fight with? Are they usin' 'em for ... evil?"
                        ],
                        "Merchant (Airdeck)": [
                                "Do you think it's because of the reconstruction in Nalbina? All these seeq and bangaa onboard, I mean. It's not helping me relax, I'll say that."
                        ]
                },
                "Rabanastran": {
                        "Rabanastran (man kneeling in front of shelf)": [
                                "Hm? The other secret? Well ... all right. I'll let you in on it. But don't go spreading it around, okay? Libra is great, but there is some information you can only see without Libra. When you target a foe without using Libra, its name will appear red, yellow, or blue. The color tells you how strong your opponent is. Foes whose names are red are very powerful. Foes whose names are yellow will put up a fight. Foes whose names are blue should make easy prey."
                        ],
                        "Rabanastran (black bangaa chatting with seeq)": [
                                "My friend here says there are 14,264 cobblestones in the Southern Plaza 'round the corner, not including the tiles in the fountain. But even with the stones by the city gates ... 'Course, he could be countin' the flagstones, too. That would be another matter altogether."
                        ]
                },
                "Rabanastran (tan seeq)": {
                        "Rabanastran (orange seeq)": [
                                "Hrmph. I don't know if it's because of the Consul or not, but things are just a little too on edge around here for my liking. If he thinks tightening his grip on the city will help, he's got another thing comin'. People will only resent him the more."
                        ]
                },
                "Rabanastran (blue seeq)": {
                        "Rabanastran (blue seeq pacing about)": [
                                "Migelo hasn't seemed hisself lately. Something's been worrying at him ... but what?"
                        ],
                        "Rabanastran (light blue seeq on east side)": [
                                "So the ceremony ended without incident, eh? Good! I don't care much for the Empire, but I care even less for trouble.",
                                "There are those who care little for the Empire. No doubt they are the reason behind the show of Imperial force today."
                        ],
                        "Rabanastran (light blue seeq on west side)": [
                                "They're holding a banquet in the palace after the parade is over. Delicacies and delectables the likes of us'll never taste, boy."
                        ]
                },
                "Rabanastran (light blue seeq)": {
                        "Rabanastran (blue seeq pacing about)": [
                                "This is a big night for Migelo. He's in charge of the preparations for the fete, isn't he? Let's hope it goes off without a hitch.",
                                "Migelo's back to his old jolly self again. Though he seems a bit ... wistful, I suppose is the word. Like a father whose children have flown the nest."
                        ],
                        "Rabanastran (light blue seeq on east side)": [
                                "Things have finally settled down 'round here. They've even reopened the aerodrome! Not that I'll be flyin' anywhere ..."
                        ],
                        "Rabanastran (light blue seeq on west side)": [
                                "They'll be starting that fete in the palace soon. Ah, the food they'll have ... What I wouldn't give for just a taste!",
                                "Did you know there's a mine right in the middle of Bhujerba? Hard work, mining, but the pay's tempting, so it is. Bhujerba's run by one Marquis Ondore. Supposed to be a right generous fellow, so maybe the money's as good as they say."
                        ]
                },
                "Shop Clerk": {
                        "Shop Clerk (Migelo's)": [
                                "Welcome to Migelo's Sundries! How might I be of service?",
                                "That's quite a stone you've got there. If Migelo were here, I'm sure he'd want to take a look, but he hasn't been in today. Ah, but I don't suppose you came here for small talk, did you."
                        ],
                        "Shop Clerk (outside Mait's)": [
                                "Svagatam! We are newly open. Come inside Mait's Magicks! We have only the best at Mait's!",
                                "Need magicks, just in case? Mait's Magicks is just the place. Come in, bhadra, come in!"
                        ],
                        "Shop Clerk (Rithil's)": [
                                "Svagatam ... (yawn)",
                                "Svagatam ... (yawn) Kah ... ? A resistance against the Empire? Never heard of it ...",
                                "Svagatam ... (yawn) My son, he tells me to ... to leave the work to him. But ... (yawn) I must do my part, yes.",
                                "Svagatam ... (yawn) There is talk for a war ... about to begin. Still ... (yawn) I wonder why business is so slow.",
                                "Is that? Perhaps? Could it be!? Bhujerban Madhu!? Oh, for just a taste ... or for the whole bottle! How about 1000 gil, bhadra?",
                                "Many thanks to you, bhadra. Nothing like spirits to raise the, er, spirits ...",
                                "That ... is most unfortunate."
                        ],
                        "Shop Clerk (Targe's)": [
                                "Welcome! Welcome! Targe's Arms is here to serve your every need ... as long as your every need is weapons!"
                        ],
                        "Shop Clerk (Miner's End)": [
                                "Welcome to Clio's Technicks, kupo! Open for business, and ready to serve!"
                        ]
                },
                "Street Kid": {
                        "Street Kid (near window)": [
                                "Haa, I am quite concerned, for the aerodrome is filled with Imperial army ships! Will the regular airships be allowed to fly?"
                        ],
                        "Street Kid (in yellow, with mother kneeling in front of her)": [
                                "An Imperial soldier gave me a sweet, so I took it. Why is amba cross with me?"
                        ],
                        "Street Kid (in blue, on ledge)": [
                                "We're going to play at sky pirates! No, you may not join us. Do not bother asking!"
                        ],
                        "Street Kid (Travica Way)": [
                                "Amba, she says the raksas Diabolos will come and take me away to the mines. Who is scared by such fables!? Not me.",
                                "Tatah works in the mines, but today he has off. He will play with me today!",
                                "Amba, she always says the raksas Diabolos will come and take me away to the mines. When amba and tatah were little like me, the Diabolos came and took away all the children with hats. Now, it sleeps among the stones, they say. It is a silly story.",
                                "Tatah works in the mines, but he has not gone to work in a very long time. He says they are not sending so many stones to the Empire any more.",
                                "Amba, she always says the raksas Diabolos will come and take me away to the mines. This is a ghost story meant to frighten me, yes? Indeed, a friend of mine has gone missing ... But the Diabolos did not do this ... right?"
                        ]
                },
                "Street Vendor": {
                        "Street Vendor (Kweli's Last Stand)": [
                                "Traveler! Pause a moment! Take a look!"
                        ]
                },
                "Traveler": {
                        "Traveler (Muthru)": [
                                "I never imagined Rabanastre to be so delightful! A bustling center of trade and commerce, with just a hint of the exotic.",
                                "I never imagined Rabanastre to be so delightful! And with Lord Vayne ruling the city, it's sure to prosper as never before!",
                                "Rabanastre seems so much more cultured since Lord Vayne was appointed consul. This city grows more charming by the day!",
                                "Vayne was scheduled to make an inspection of the Bazaar, but it was canceled for some reason. I wonder what could have happened?",
                                "Delightful it may be, but Rabanastre is not my home. It is time that I returned. What tales I have to tell!",
                                "I worry about what is to come. For Rabanastre, the Empire ... I fear even to return to my home."
                        ],
                        "Traveler (North End)": [
                                "Isn't Rabanastre marvelous? Fascinating in ways wholly different from Archades. I've even taken to the local fashion!",
                                "Under Vayne's rule, Rabanastre will flourish as never before. I'm sure of it! I may even consider moving here myself!",
                                "Life is easier in Archades, no question. But Lord Vayne is here in Rabanastre ... Should I stay? Should I go? What to do!?",
                                "Apparently Vayne's been summoned back to Archades. I'm sure it will only be temporary, though. If not, what reason have I to remain in Rabanastre? Oh, I do hope he comes back soon.",
                                "Our Emperor is dead, and Vayne rules as autocrat in his stead. How terrible! If I'd known this was going to happen, I would never have moved to this city! O cruel fate!"
                        ],
                        "Traveler (Observation Parlour)": [
                                "You killing time, too? My friend's asleep in his cabin. Can you imagine, wasting time sleeping on a voyage like this?"
                        ],
                        "Traveler (Sky Saloon)": [
                                "My sister and I keep a small villa just outside Bhujerba. We're on our way there now. Haven't been on holiday in ages. It'll do us good!"
                        ],
                        "Traveler (man in Archadian clothes leaning on counter)": [
                                "Contrary to popular belief in these parts, not everyone in Archades has his own airship! No, only the rich and privileged have those."
                        ],
                        "Traveler (blonde man in blue)": [
                                "Finally, the skyferry's starting up again ... Of course my airship's still delayed! Tsk. No respect for class, these peasants!"
                        ],
                        "Traveler (woman with the Archadian group at window)": [
                                "The return ship to Archades still hasn't come. But I've patience enough to go on waiting. It's not as though they could have forgotten me.",
                                "Lord Vayne May be the acting emperor right now, but it's obvious he will be our actual emperor before long."
                        ]
                },
                "Traveling Merchant": {
                        "Traveling Merchant (Sky Saloon)": [
                                "Balms and tinctures sell good, but not so good as magicks. And then not half as good as magicite! Off to Bhujerba to lay in a supply of the finest magicite I can get my hands on. There's huge gain to be had sellin' the stuff in Archades.",
                                "Friend o' mine was sent off to Nalbina. A petty offense – ought to have been able to pay a fine and be done with it. Turn of ill luck. Luckily he managed to get out, somehow. Saw him toiling away last time I was passin' through Nalbina. Better an' rottin' in a dungeon."
                        ],
                        "Traveling Merchant (North Sprawl)": [
                                "Business's been mighty slow. Help me out and buy somethin', would ya?"
                        ],
                        "Traveling Merchant (South Sprawl)": [
                                "Ain't hardly sold nothin' today. Can't expect the likes of these to put up hard gil, though. Ah well, go on, have a look.",
                                "One of my regulars had an unexpected guest drop in. Weird fellow, couldn't quite place him ... Anyway, you here to buy somethin', kid?"
                        ]
                },
                "Archadian Wayfarer": {
                        "Archadian Wayfarer (Travica Way)": [
                                "That Ondore! He has the temerity to turn me, a citizen of the Empire, away at his gate? He needs to be taught a lesson in humility, he does. Eh? Ondore's residence? Just up these steps and to the left. You're not getting in, though. Trust me.",
                                "Ondore's residence? It's up these steps here and to the left. Though a commoner such as yourself isn't like to be granted admission. Not when Imperial citizens are being turned away!",
                                "We can't afford to throw Vayne out ... not yet. I'd use his brother, the child, to get the Senate back its power ... with Ondore's help of course."
                        ],
                        "Lost Archadian Wayfarer": [
                                "... I hate to admit this, but I fear I'm lost. Ridiculous! First I get lost in Rabanastre, now in Bhujerba! It's poor urban planning, I tell you!",
                                "To tell the truth ... I'm quite lost. I suppose I could speak to one of these guides, but it is quite beneath me to ask provincials for assistance ...",
                                "With the passing of Emperor Gramis, the Empire is in chaos. Chaos! I cannot go home like this ..."
                        ],
                        "Archadian Wayfarer (Clio's)": [
                                "My brother works in a laboratory in Archades. He says he will come soon to Bhujerba on military duty, and, if time allows, learn mooglecraft.",
                                "My brother works in a laboratory in Archades. He will soon arrive in Bhujerba with the 8th Fleet. I am to wait for him here, you see.",
                                "Did you see the 8th Archadian Fleet, pride of the Empire? My brother rode on the Leviathan, but they left as soon as they came. I could not meet him after all.",
                                "My brother works in a laboratory in Archades. He was with the 8th Fleet, but we've lost contact. I hope nothing untoward has befallen him!",
                                "My brother, he is a researcher at Draklor Laboratory, you see. He said he would one day like to learn mooglecraft, but his ship ... went down. I know he is lost to me, but still, I come to this shop. You see ... I was to meet him here."
                        ],
                        "Drunken Archadian Wayfarer": [
                                "P-Pardon ... Please, stop shouting like that ... Urgh, my head, it pounds! Bhujerban Madhu is as sweet as her maids, and as strong as her Stones!",
                                "How many cups have I drunk? Sweet Bhujerban Madhu, I am yours! Once I thought the world revolved around Archades, but now I know ... It spins around ME! (hic)",
                                "Must ... return ... Archades ... nnngh. O, sweet madhu ... you have been a mistress most cruel. How can I hope to leave your embrace? (hic)"
                        ],
                        "Archadian Wayfarer (Cloudborne Row)": [
                                "I came to see the source of the power that keeps this land of Dorstonis afloat, yet with the Lhusu Mines closed ...",
                                "I came here to see the Lhusu Mines, yet the locals here speak of some monstrosities running amok ... I had so wanted to see natural magicite! (sigh)",
                                "I will see natural magicite before I go home to Archades. They'll have solved the unpleasantness in the mines by now, I should think."
                        ],
                        "Archadian Wayfarer (Temple Grounds)": [
                                "Can't fly in jagd so I came by ship, but the view from here was worth the long journey. I'm no believer, but this place is impressive."
                        ],
                        "Archadian Wayfarer (Boy)": [
                                "This weak-kneed bangaa is worthless, utterly worthless. Just like every other hunter my father employs. You wouldn't happen to be a hunter, would you? I'd like to hire you to deal with a terrible menace in the Sochen Cave Palace!",
                                "What are you mumbling about? Hmm? You want to see my bill again? Fine, be my guest."
                        ],
                        "Archadian Wayfarer (Father)": [
                                "You're one of those Phon Coast hunters, aren't you? Good, I've work for you. In a hurry, you see. Have to find my son ... wherever he is.",
                                "Do you plan on waiting here all day? Eh? You wish to see my bill again? Is your memory as poor as your sense of industry?",
                                "I hired hunter after hunter to defeat the mysterious menace within the Sochen Cave Palace, yet all returned empty-handed. Craven curs to a man! And I was separated from my son. Oh, most foul of days!",
                                "Going to Sochen Cave Palace? Then go to the Highlands to the east, then to the Fields of Eternity north of there to find the entrance. You may encounter a well-dressed, clever-looking boy along the way ... my son. Please tell him his father waits for him here."
                        ]
                },
                "Desert Wayfarer": {
                        "Desert Wayfarer (woman sitting on crate)": [
                                "The Imperials have lifted the blockade on the road, but the sun, I think it's gotten to my father. We may need to rest here a while. Chocobos don't come cheap, and with all these delays ... I hope he can afford it."
                        ],
                        "Desert Wayfarer (bangaa)": [
                                "Off to Rabanastre to restock our inventory, but my partner ... he's let the desert get the better of him. Don't make the same mistake, boy."
                        ],
                        "Desert Wayfarer (Archadian woman speaking with her husband and daughter)": [
                                "Fun? What fun is there in a trip through this sand and heat? I'm going home. And not to the capital ... home for good!"
                        ]
                },
                "Docent": {
                        "Aerodrome Docent": [
                                "Welcome to the aerodrome, sir. The East Ivalice Company proudly offers passage aboard leisure craft on which you might shop and enjoy your flight. For those eager to reach their destination, we also have ships with private cabins in which you can sleep or rest until your arrival. You may book passage from the counters you'll find throughout the aerodrome. Each counter serves a different destination."
                        ]
                },
                "Bhujerban Guru": {
                        "Bhujerban Guru (Mait's)": [
                                "Marquis Ondore keeps a wary distance from the Empire, bhadra. Our relations with Archades are cordial, for now, though I fear for the future ...",
                                "Marquis Ondore keeps a wary distance from the Empire, bhadra. Our relations with Archades are cordial, for now, though I fear for the future ... Never before have Judge Magisters walked so boldly on Bhujerban soil, you see.",
                                "Relations between the Marquis Ondore and the Empire worsen daily. The question is, how will the Marquis move? Whichever way it is, I would think making the first move to be the wisest choice of all.",
                                "I do not know how the Imperial fleet stands, yet it is clear that, against the entire fleet, we would stand little chance, bhadra. I believe that the Marquis sees this too. He will seek a peaceful resolution through words before he raises the sword.",
                                "That ... is a bottle of Bhujerban Madhu, is it not? So rare, so rare, now that the Imperials have found a thirst for the stuff. Will you not sell it to me? 1000 gil I give you!",
                                "Thank you, bhadra. Ah ... fulfillment awaits!",
                                "Yes, yes, better when one has not partaken in a long while ... Mmm ...",
                                "This life is filled with disappointments. Though, that was a rather big one."
                        ],
                        "Bhujerban Guru (Miner's End)": [
                                "Ah ... I seen some sour-lookin' bangaa about. Eh? Bangaa ... and a hume girl? Sorry, bhadra. Seen nothin' of the sort.",
                                "Ah ... I seen some sour-lookin' bangaa about. Wastrels like them shouldn't be let to roam the streets. 'Tis bad for our image, eh?",
                                "Now I hear that those ill-favored bangaa were the headhunter Ba'Gamnan and his crew ... Who were they after, I wonder?",
                                "Listen, bhadra. You know the board where bills for marks are posted in the Cloudborne? Who puts them there? No one knows. Mysterious!"
                        ],
                        "Bhujerban Guru (Cloudborne Row)": [
                                "Haa ... I have recently met the leader of the parijanah guides, Havharo. Very mysterious, very handsome! He frequents the Cloudborne, you know.",
                                "Do you know the leader of the parijanah guides, Havharo? Very mysterious, very handsome ... and very friendly with Melisa at the Cloudborne.",
                                "I have not seen Havharo for many days now. Does he no longer come to the Cloudborne? I worry for Melisa. She did seem quite fond of him.",
                                "I have heard that Havharo is off to war with the Marquis! I hope that he comes home whole, for Melisa's sake and ... and for mine."
                        ]
                },
                "Bill?": {
                        "Archadian Wayfarer (Boy)": [
                                "East of here you come to the Highlands. North of there lie the Fields of Eternity, wherein can be found the entrance to Sochen. The foul scourge I wish you to defeat lurks within the cave palace. Many hunters have been sent, and all have come running home. Incidentally, I have no idea what this scourge is or looks like. No one that returns will speak of it. ...Intriguing, no? My father, wanting to know the identity of this fell creature, thought to post a bill for the mark ... but was refused! Having no other choice, he employed two hunters from the Hunter's Camp on the Phon Coast, and sent them into Sochen Cave Palace! A pity they were worthless ... I waited with my father at the entrance to the caves and they came running back out mere moments later. They ran right past my father, their employer. Unbelievable! Enraged, I gave chase ... and was separated from my father. Anyway, I'm glad we've met. Were ito hire better hunters than my father, and defeat this monstrosity, oh, the respect I'd earn back in Archades! So, you're hired. Use this key to get into the cavern where you'll find the creature! And no coming back until you've slain it!",
                                "Are you ... scared? You are, aren't you. Coward. Yet another mewling puss. (sigh)",
                                "The petitioner is me, right here before you. If you've time to waste chatting with me, get on with the hunt! Go to the Highlands to the east, then to the Fields of Eternity north of there to find the entrance. Got it? Good!",
                                "Go to the Highlands to the east, then to the Fields of Eternity north of there to find the entrance. Got it? Good!"
                        ],
                        "Archadian Wayfarer (Father)": [
                                "Head to a place known as the Highlands. From there, go north into the Fields of Eternity where you'll find the entrance to Sochen. The menace you must defeat is within. Many are the hunters that have attempted to slay it ... all have come running back out, defeated. The exact nature of the beast is unknown. Nor have any of the hunters that ran said as much as a word ... To put an end to this scourge, I thought to post a bill for its hunting ... Those clansmen refused my expertly written wanted bill, saying it was \"crude and ingenuous in its execution.\" They wanted me to rewrite it! Wounded, I withdrew my posting. I thereupon hired two hunters from the Phon Coast and sent them into the cave ... the craven curs! As my son and I waited by the entrance, these two so-called \"hunters\" came running out and past us, completely ignoring me, their employer! Enraged, I gave chase, managing to catch one of the two, lying upon the ground, utterly useless. Worse, I was separated from my son. So went all until now. Understood? Very well! Now I will call my servants from Archades to search for my son, while you enter the caves! Use this key to access the chamber where this menace may be found. Off with you!",
                                "Are you as witless as you are craven? I'm the petitioner! Me! East to the Highlands, north into the Fields of Eternity, and into the caves! Got it? You're quite sure? Shall I repeat it again!?",
                                "Are you as witless as you are craven? I'm the petitioner! Me! East to the Highlands, north into the Fields of Eternity, and into the caves! Got it? You're quite sure? Shall I beat it into your pate!?"
                        ]
                },
                "Nalbinite": {
                        "Nalbinite (bangaa)": [
                                "They say a horrible creature that lost a war with the gods lurks even now in the Mosphoran Highwaste. 'Tis a local legend."
                        ]
                },
                "Game Hunter": {
                        "Game Hunter (Tchita)": [
                                "I'm a hunter, out of the Phon Coast ... contracted to defeat this menace in the Sochen Cave Palace, but I can't find my employer! Where is he ... ? We were supposed to meet in the Tchita Uplands ... but this is the road to Cerobi Steppe! Must've taken a wrong turn somewhere ..."
                        ]
                },
                "Gurdy": {
        ",
                                "Here's the exception:",
                                "When you first speak to Gurdy"
                "Starving Child": {
                        "Starving Child (small boy)": [
                                "Wystan's kind to us. I like him. This is for me?"
                        ],
                        "Starving Child (small girl)": [
                                "But Wystan always plays with us! Why won't he come out and play?"
                        ],
                        "Starving Child (tall boy)": [
                                "I ain't goin' nowhere, mister! I'm too hungry to move, besides, so you'll have to carry me!",
                                "I ain't goin' nowhere, missus! I'm too hungry to move, besides, so you'll have to carry me!"
                        ],
                        "Starving Child (tall girl)": [
                                "I like playing with Wystan. He makes sure no one bullies us."
                        ]
                },
                "Oracle of Light": {
                        "Ryne": [
                                "No. Stand back. We shall stay the Flood.",
                                "Your time has not yet come. When all hangs in the balance, you must give them hope."
                        ],
                        "Minfilia Warde": [
                                "Ours is a meeting long overdue. Full glad am I that we may finally speak.",
                                "My dear, sweet child ... Yours is a burden none should ever be forced to bear. Such pain and suffering you have endured, yet still you came. For this and more, I thank you.",
                                "Yet here you stand, resolved. Now ... tell me your heart's desire.",
                                "Indeed you could. Their radiance would be unmistakable. But know, my child, that the power you seek will come at a price. We stand now at the crossroads. A decision must be made. 'Tis only natural to be afraid. To hesitate. But for your many trials, you have grown stronger and wiser. And with the love and support of those you hold dear, you have grown to love yourself.",
                                "'Tis a beautiful, wonderful dream. One we share. Though my power was all but spent in staying the Flood, I prayed this final act would give hope to those who survived. That selfsame hope lives on in you. It gives me comfort to know that the future is in capable hands. If ever you should falter, remember this: no one, however powerful, is immune to the whisperings of doubt and despair. Do not give in to them, but do not deny them either. Look instead to the light within, that you may continue to serve as a beacon to others.",
                                "Dearest friend ... no words can express my gratitude to you for keeping her safe in these tumultuous times. You are a hero to us both. But not even the most valiant heroes can stand alone. Only together may you change the fate of two worlds."
                        ]
                },
                "Arrivals Attendant": {
                        "Arrivals Attendant (Limsa Lominsa)": [
                                "Ah, you must be the envoy from Gridania! Welcome to Limsa Lominsa, my lady. Admiral Bloefhiswyn awaits your arrival. Please let me know if you require any assistance.",
                                "Ah, you must be the envoy from Gridania! Welcome to Limsa Lominsa, my lord. Admiral Bloefhiswyn awaits your arrival. Please let me know if you require any assistance."
                        ],
                        "Arrivals Attendant (Ul'dah)": [
                                "Ah, you must be the envoy from Gridania! Welcome to Ul'dah, sir. The Flame General awaits your arrival.",
                                "Ah, you must be the envoy from Gridania! Welcome to Ul'dah, madam. The Flame General awaits your arrival.",
                                "Please let me know if you require any assistance."
                        ]
                },
                "???": {
                        "Korutt": ["I'll do it! I'll go with them!"],
                        "Kai-Shirr": [
                                "Ohhh! So that one's Alphinaud! ... Unless you're triplets?",
                                "Finally! I've found you!"
                        ],
                        "Hythlodaeus": [
                                " ... May I? You, I think, are from a time beyond ours. Have you followed in the wake of Emet-Selch? Nay, there is no cause for alarm. I am simply a shade. Here and not here.",
                                "Well, well. We meet again, my new old friend."
                        ],
                        "Ardbert": [
                                "This day we reclaim the reins of history! This day we rid ourselves of the Ascians forever!",
                                "We can and will, Ascian! You shall see─or perhaps you will not!",
                                "So you are the Warrior of Light. The savior of Eorzea. It's a wonder you didn't come sooner, what with the primal and all. Lost a step, have we?",
                                " ... You ... ? I know you ... You're the Warrior of Light from the Source!",
                                "What? Did you just ... You can hear me!? Oh, gods, how long has it been ... ? ... Aye ... aye, that was what I called myself in your world ... The “Warrior of Darkness.” My real name is Ardbert. I used an alias in the Source. A daft one, looking back ... ",
                                "What? Did you just ... You can hear me!? Oh, gods, how long has it been ... ? ... “And who are you?” she says. An enemy not worth remembering, apparently ... My name is Ardbert. In the First, I was a Warrior of Light, but in the Source you knew me as the Warrior of Darkness."
                        ],
                        "Scream": ["Uwaaah!"],
                        "Male Voice": ["Bloody hells!"],
                        "Alphinaud": ["Y'shtola! Thank goodness you're still here."],
                        "Sundhimal": [
                                "Ah, another novice adventurer. Aye, Baderon has sent more than a few of your kind this way of late."
                        ],
                        "Sylph Emissary": [
                                "Grave tidings, walking ones! Grave, grave tidings!"
                        ],
                        "Ephemeral Voice": [
                                "Hear me ... Hear me ... Darkness comes ... and with it ... the end ... The fate ... of the star ... is in your hands ..."
                        ],
                        "Elidibus": [
                                "Did I not tell you, my friends!? You are Warriors of Light!",
                                "Do you think? I find it amusing. Like dogs herding cattle to the slaughterhouse."
                        ],
                        "Emet-Selch": [
                                "To be subjected to such deplorable treatment ... Such ingratitude! You have my sympathies, sir. You do so much good for this city, and you could do so much more, were you not surrounded by fools ... ",
                                "You certainly took your time. I had half resolved to complete the task myself.",
                                "Well, well, we have a historian in our midst. That spares me a lengthy explanation."
                        ],
                        "G'raha Tia": [
                                "Herin I commit the chronicle of the traveler. Shepherd to the stars in the dark. Though the world be sundered and our souls set adrift, where you walk, my dearest friend, fate shall surely follow. For yours is the Fourteenth seat─the seat of Azem.",
                                "Indeed. We succeeded in weaving it anew, albeit at a slightly diminished potency than when I had Beq Lugg's assistance. It is no cause for concern, though. The tower is not easily reached, never mind breached. And even should some few succeed, their presence won't escape my notice.",
                                "Well ... if you're certain that's what you ... I-I mean, if you think I ... "
                        ],
                        "Y'shtola": ["Enough. Runar, report."],
                        "Hathenbet": [
                                "Beggin' your pardon, Master Chai ... But have you got time for a word?"
                        ],
                        "Beq Lugg": ["Ah! There you all are!"],
                        "Glynard": ["That sounds like a challenge that he would enjoy."],
                        "Male Onlooker 1": ["Look!"],
                        "Male Onlooker 2": ["The Elder Seedseer!"],
                        "Female Onlooker 1": ["Twelve bless her heart!"],
                        "Zenos Galvus": [
                                "Aaagh!",
                                "Gaius! You've missed your part in this, I'm afraid."
                        ],
                        "Riol": ["Beggin' yer pardon, but could I have a word?"],
                        "Wounded Guard": ["You know the Exarch?"],
                        "Kan-E-Senna": ["Many and more."],
                        "Lyna": ["Understood.", "Might we also say a few words?"],
                        "Glagg": ["Who goes there!?"],
                        "Male Voice 2": ["Is there aught we can do to help?"],
                        "Tristol": ["I say, aren't you the ones who saved my life?"],
                        "Thancred": [
                                "As you command, O Lilira. Forgive my selfish desire to assure your welfare.",
                                "We both know I can do no such thing. It isn't safe for you here alone. It isn't safe for anyone ─not with this aetheric disturbance ... It's as though the dead are watching us ... And I'd prefer not to join them, if it's all the same to you. Ah, you must be the one that Papashan mentioned. Congratulations on finding our elusive young charge. You'll have to forgive Her Impetuousness. What she lacks in discipline, she makes up for in stubbornness. How peculiar ... I could swear we've met, but haven't the faintest recollection as to where or when. Must be the damned heat playing tricks on me. I'd best retire before I start having visions. You should return with us. The stationmaster will be eager to thank Lady Lilira's protector in person.",
                                "Alas, the stationmaster will have to wait. Dear Lilira, for my sake, please stay out of harm's way. As for you, dear friend─for Lilira's sake─please stay in harm's way!",
                                "Ah, coming around now.",
                                "If only I knew. A denizen of the void, at any rate.",
                                "The question isn't how, but who─we're not dealing with bookless bandits. Don't suppose the answer came to you in a dream? No sooner did you fell the beast than you fell asleep. Too much aether, no doubt. Interesting ... I hadn't considered the Crystal. But of course ... This changes everything.---- Hm? Oh, just thinking aloud. At any rate, we haven't a moment to spare. I must return and report this at once. I leave Lady Lilira in your capable hands!",
                                "As you wish, Your Impetuousness. I suspect we shall meet again before long. Until then, do try and stay awake!",
                                "We both know I can do no such thing."
                        ],
                        "Julia quo Soranus": [
                                "Emperor Varis! Your Radiance, are you all right!?"
                        ]
                },
                "Alliancerecruit": {
                        "Alliance Herald": [
                                "Begging your pardons! I bear a message from the Eorzean Alliance!",
                                "My lady! The Alliance leadership will soon convene to discuss the matter of Ascian interference, and they humbly request the presence of the Scions of the Seventh Dawn. Having assessed intelligence provided by the Ala Mhigan Resistance concerning the whereabouts of Zenos's remains, they too suspect Ascian involvement, and wish to deliberate a suitable course of action. As the foremost authorities on our foe, your order's counsel would be most welcome.",
                                "Thank you! The time and date of the meeting will be shared in due course, but I can confirm that the council will take place in Ala Mhigo. By your leave ... "
                        ],
                        "Alliance Recruit": [
                                "Scions! A pleasure to have you with us again. You'll be happy to hear we've taken Ala Ghiri, and have already begun fortifying it as our new base of operations in the Peaks. Give a shout to the lads as you pass, eh?"
                        ]
                },
                "Flameprivate": {
                        "Captured Flame Private 1": [
                                "They're going to kill us, aren't they!? Gods, I don't want to die! I want to go home! (sob)"
                        ],
                        "Captured Flame Private 2": [
                                "The lizardmen marched us to their stronghold. They're preparing for something ... and I for one do not want to be around when they finish."
                        ],
                        "Flame Private": [
                                "Sir!",
                                "Imperials, sir! They've fired on a Highwind Skyways airship! Scouts say she's coming down to the west, near Horizon's Edge!"
                        ]
                },
                "Boy": {
                        "Boisterous Mol Boy": [
                                "Lyse! Lyse! Look how much dung we have!",
                                "Hard? I do not understand. Why is it hard? It is better for the animals to move─to have more food to eat and land to roam. To stay in one place is harder, no?",
                                "Traveler! I will not lose to you! I shall find three times as much dung as you─at least!"
                        ],
                        "Reserved Mol Boy": [
                                " ... From the heavens comes the rain which nourishes the soil. From the soil comes the grass which nourishes the beast. From the beast comes the flesh which nourishes the Xaela. Ours is the soil of one and all.",
                                " ... Some call the Mol fools for listening to the elder gods, but it is our way. Our pride. Our ... nation?",
                                " ... How do you do."
                        ]
                },
                "Girl": {
                        "Willowy Mol Girl": [
                                "Dorbei will be happy we found enough ... ",
                                "Whenever I ask him about Doma, he just smiles and looks to the south ... It reminds me of my mother when she waits for my father to return from a long journey ... But Hien will not wait any longer, will he? Because you came for him. To take him back ... because his nation is more important ... ",
                                "I cannot seem to find any dung here. Maybe somewhere else ... ?"
                        ],
                        "Bright-eyed Mol Girl": [
                                "Not just Dorbei! Now we can continue making cheese! Not that I was worried─it was easier when we were living near that forest, but dung works just as well as wood.",
                                "But you Westerners are like the Domans─you live in the same place. In villages. And all the villages in one place are part of a “nation,” yes? Hien talks about nations sometimes. When he was injured, he spoke of Doma in his sleep, but I did not understand his words.",
                                "Oh, you are Lyse's friend! Are you here to help us too?"
                        ]
                },
                "Heretic": {
                        "Amphitheatre Heretic": [
                                "Dogs of Ishgard! Is it not enough that you banish our beloved saint? Will you not be satisfied until the ice is slick with the last drops of our blood!?",
                                "Do you think us fools, boy!? It will take more than honeyed words to earn our trust. You walk with the dragonslayer, and we know all too well what he is capable of!",
                                "Come, brothers! May dragon wings bear us to victory!",
                                "You will not defile this sacred place a second time!",
                                "(gasp) Th-They fight like demons ... 'Tis death to remain!",
                                "Fall back, brothers! Retreat to the Cinders!"
                        ],
                        "Heretic 1": ["Come here, girl!"],
                        "Heretic 3": ["My lady!?", "Have we lost!?"],
                        "Heretic 4": ["She is come!", "Peace ... ?"]
                },
                "Suspicious Coerthan (For the Greater Good)": {
                        "Suspicious Merchant": ["N-No! I have done no wrong!"]
                },
                "Imperialsoldier": {
                        "Imperial Courier": [
                                "Huh? Doesn't your senior officer have anything to say about your outfit? Not that I'm complaining, by the way─I for one would appreciate a bit more variety. I'm so used to seeing this uniform, I've caught myself saluting reflective surfaces. I'd best get back to my duties. The supplies aren't going to move themselves─and neither are the prisoners, come to that.",
                                "Oh, my apologies! I didn't notice you there, so engrossed was I in my task. You'd be engrossed, too, had the tribunus commanded you to arrange for the prisoners to be transported. Ah, your spirited salute reminds me that, uniform or no, we are all proud soldiers of the Garlean Empire. Everything we do is for the greater glory of Garlemald, be it scrubbing the privy floor or arranging for prisoners to be transported. What prisoners do I speak of? ... You mean you haven't heard? Only the infamous “Scions of the Seventh Dawn,” captured by the tribunus herself! If you don't believe me, have a look in the storage tower when next you pass that way.",
                                "The officers constantly tell me that I have the sloppiest salute in all the western lands, but in you I'd say I've finally met my match. Perhaps we could practice together?"
                        ],
                        "Imperial Decurion": [
                                "Part of the maintenance crew from Occidens, are you? I don't know what they teach you over there, but being an engineer does not exempt you from saluting your superiors! Why aren't you in uniform!? Dressed as you are, you're like to be mistaken for an adventurer! Part of the maintenance crew from Occidens, you say? I don't know what they teach you over there, but being an engineer does not exempt you from saluting your superiors!",
                                "Hm, that's a fine salute. Part of the maintenance crew from Occidens, are you? Welcome to Castrum Centri, engineer. Hm, that's a fine salute ... but why aren't you in uniform? As you are, you're like to be mistaken for an adventurer! What? Prisoners? Ah, you've heard the rumors, then. Yes, they're being held in the storage tower─but I strongly suggest you pay them no mind. You were summoned here to work, not to gawp at Eorzea's defeated heroes. Now show a bit of enthusiasm, or I'll have you reported.",
                                "What was that supposed to be? A salute? I'll have you know, being an engineer does not give you license to be sloppy! Do it till you get it right!"
                        ],
                        "Imperial Guard": [
                                "Whoa ... Where did you leave your uniform!? If one of the brass hats sees you, you'll be in for the dressing-down of your life! Hm? Shouldn't I be at my post? (sigh) I suppose so, but such things don't seem to matter anymore. I've ... I've fallen for one of the prisoners. She's all I can think about of late. Am I ... am I a deviant for wanting her to salute me?",
                                "Greetings, comrade. Forgive me for asking, but you haven't visited the storage tower recently, have you? I only ask because I dropped something in there, and ... um ... Oh, who am I fooling!? I've fallen for one of the prisoners, all right!? I daresay you know the one I mean. ... Eh? The svelte blonde? Goodness, no! It's the Lalafellin lass I'm smitten with! She's so adorable, it hurts! I want to sweep her up into my arms and squeeze her till my arms ache! What do you reckon it would take to convince the centurion to lend me the key so I can see her?",
                                "No, no, no! You're doing it all wrong! Unless you can master a good old-fashioned imperial salute, you'll never amount to anything in this army. Take the centurion, for example: his every salute's the same. It's no wonder he's been entrusted with such responsibility. Which is probably why he's been trusted with the keys to the storage tower."
                        ],
                        "Imperial Centurion": [
                                "Why are you not at your post? If you have business, salute me before opening your mouth. Unless you can explain why you are not in uniform, and during a period of heightened security, to boot, you have earned yourself time in a black cell.",
                                "What's this? You need access to the storage tower? What business have you there? What's this? You need access to the storage tower? What business have you there? ... At the tribunus's behest, you say? This is highly irregular, but it would not do to make my lady wroth. Take my identification key. See that it is returned when your errand is concluded.",
                                "What mummery is this? You have just earned yourself a fortnight in a black cell. Report to detention at the end of your shift."
                        ]
                },
                "Mana": {
                        "Languid Youth": [
                                "Hm? Who are you? You seek company? For an hour or an evening?",
                                "Ugh, how it reeks of perfume and desperation. I know naught of it, nor do I wish to know.",
                                "Oh, if only I could relax like this every day ... "
                        ]
                },
                "Npc": {
                        "Bronze-skinned Beauty": [
                                "Congratulations, sweetling! Now relax and enjoy the show─it's only just begun!",
                                "(Your Elezen friend is quite the dashing rogue. Any chance you could introduce me?)"
                        ],
                        "Established Astrologian": [
                                "What a relief to see someone other than a godsdamned birdman! I thought I could finish my work whilst the Ixal were away, but they returned far quicker than I anticipated. It was all I could do to hide and hope they might leave again before I froze to─ Wait, who are you!? You are not one of our knights! A man of House Durendaire cannot be seen in the company of an unbeliever! Good day, sir!",
                                "What a relief to see someone other than a godsdamned birdman! I thought I could finish my work whilst the Ixal were away, but they returned far quicker than I anticipated. It was all I could do to hide and hope they might leave again before I froze to─ Wait, who are you!? You are not one of our knights! A man of House Durendaire cannot be seen in the company of an unbeliever! Good day, madam!"
                        ],
                        "Discomposed Cataloger": [
                                "How quickly the commoners' opinions change. They say Lord Francel is innocent now, but just a few days prior ... Anyway, you were inquiring as to the whereabouts of an airship last seen in Coerthas several days before the Calamity, yes? Well, it so happens that I was monitoring the night sky at the Observatorium during that period. I recall that a small vessel came from the direction of Gridania and landed near the Stone Vigil, in the far northwest. The garrison almost certainly seized the vessel and brought it within their walls. If so, then you would need an army of knights to have any hope of securing it. Though Lord Haurchefant is, from all indications, quite fond of you, so mayhap he can lend you a few? In any case, I have done my part. I shall pray for your success, friend."
                        ],
                        "Grey Fleet Miller": [
                                "Trachtoum? You in here drinking again? If you are, that goobbue had better be dead!",
                                "Is that a fact? And what will your friend here say if I ask him?",
                                "Is that a fact? And what will your friend here say if I ask her?",
                                "Tell me true: was it Trachtoum who slew that goobbue ... or was it you?",
                                " ... Tidus? Tidus? Who in the seven hells is Tidus!? Some primal you fought in a drink-sodden dream? The Company of Heroes slew Titan, you bloody half-wit!",
                                "That's the biggest load of Sahagin shite I've ever heard. Both of you, outside! We'll learn the truth the Lominsan way! Trachtoum─if you didn't slay that goobbue, you may consider your contract revoked!"
                        ],
                        "Keeled-over Knight": [
                                "If it wasn't for you, sir, I reckon they would've finished me off. Despicable dragon-loving bastards. (spit) Death was a mercy they didn't deserve. I prayed the rumors were mistaken, but this confirms the worst. I must immediately inform my superiors that the heretics are operating within this region. Fare thee well, friend.",
                                "If it wasn't for you, miss, I reckon they would've finished me off. Despicable dragon-loving bastards. (spit) Death was a mercy they didn't deserve. I prayed the rumors were mistaken, but this confirms the worst. I must immediately inform my superiors that the heretics are operating within this region. Fare thee well, friend."
                        ],
                        "Ambushed Porter": [
                                "Gods bless ye, friend! It's all here, every last─ah, but wait. That chest over there looks like it might've been pillaged. Bloody hells, that's the personal property of Lord Francel, too ..."
                        ]
                },
                "Npca": {
                        "Riled Lass": [
                                "What those animals did to Bertliana is unforgivable! And to think they look down on us! Well, I'll suffer this humiliation no more! I'm with Wilred to the bitter end! I'm not afraid of a few lizards!",
                                "M-Mercy! Please don't kill me!"
                        ],
                        "Vesper Bay Shopkeep": [
                                "Eh? Ye don't look like one of them church fellas. Not that I'll turn ye away, no sir. As ye can see, we've got a pile of unidentified bodies over yonder. No one's come to claim 'em, so off to the lichyard they go. Be thankful ye didn't have to go inside and see the carnage for yerself. 'Twas the stuff of nightmares, I tell ye. Godsdamned imperials. (spit) I don't know what quarrel they had with these folks, and I sure as hells don't want to know. The sooner we put this behind us, the better. Say ... ain't I seen you 'round here afore? Or do ye just have one of them faces? Ah, never mind ... Anyroad, there's a carriage come to haul the bodies to the lichyard, out by the east gate. There's only eight left to load up, but seein' as I'm exhausted from carryin' all the others, I've a mind to leave the remainder to you. Might want to cover yer nose while ye work. Some of these folk're startin' to turn ... "
                        ],
                        "Mead-soaked Midlander": [
                                "What are you starin' at!? You wanna keep them eyes in yer face?",
                                "Ugh! Nophica's teats, that's cold! What do you mean, “no fightin'”? This Duskwight scum was─ Yeah, yeah, I know the rules. That bastard gets to keep his skin ... for now."
                        ],
                        "Plain-spoken Porter": [
                                "No time to talk─we're on a tight schedule. Once we've made our deliveries here, we're to deliver parcels to Skyfire Locks."
                        ],
                        "Amiable Imperial": [
                                "My wife bore me a son not long after I was sent here. I can't wait to go home and meet him. One of our informers, I take it? (sigh) Do you have any idea what will happen if you're seen with us? The insurgents will have your head!"
                        ],
                        "Absent-minded Merchant": [
                                "On the trail of a masked man? Aye, I've heard of him ... but only in hushed tones and faint whispers. It's said he wears a black hooded robe, an' looks right suspicious. An' that's about all I can say, little though it is.",
                                "It's said he wears a black hooded robe, an' looks right suspicious. An' that's about all I can say, little though it is."
                        ],
                        "Agitated Ala Mhigan": [
                                "C-Captain! It's ... it's Gallien, sir! His wound's gone an' festered, an' he's burnin' up! I don't think he's got much time!"
                        ],
                        "Unsettled Knight": [
                                "(pant) It's ... it's not safe here! We must flee!",
                                "I heard the beast's cries from over yonder. Then Lord Francel is safe? Bless you, sir, bless you!",
                                "I heard the beast's cries from over yonder. Then Lord Francel is safe? Bless you, miss, bless you!"
                        ],
                        "House Durandaire Knight": [
                                "Good to have you with us, sir. When Lord Drillemont arrives, we are to confront the inquisitor. If he refuses to go quietly, we will need to use force. Are you prepared for that eventuality?",
                                "Good to have you with us, miss. When Lord Drillemont arrives, we are to confront the inquisitor. If he refuses to go quietly, we will need to use force. Are you prepared for that eventuality?"
                        ],
                        "Riled Youth": [
                                "Wh-What went wrong? It was supposed to be easy!"
                        ]
                },
                "Npcb": {
                        "Riled Youth": [
                                "If this plan succeeds, we'll have the power to lay the Empire low! To change the world for the better! Might be as Gundobald's content to eke out an existence in this musty old cave, but I'll be damned if I'm going to spend the rest of my life here. Now, where in the seven hells did I put that bloody map?",
                                "Wh-What went wrong? It was supposed to be easy! Damn it all to the seven hells!",
                                "Wh-What went wrong? It was supposed to be easy!"
                        ],
                        "Disconcerted Coachman": [
                                "What happened to the big fella? Ah, forget it. Just bring the next batch and toss 'em in the back─ain't like they'll complain if you're rough!",
                                "Well, ain't you a strong one. Four in one trip! Reckon there's no need for me to lend you a hand with the rest, then.",
                                "Come on, come on! Let's finish this before I die of old age.",
                                "That should be all of 'em! Thanks for the help. Reckon it won't take too long to deliver all the corpses to the lichyard. Even so, you might want to hurry back an' tell 'em that our work here is done.",
                                "What? Wondering why I'm still here? Hells, I don't need to rush. Ain't like these folk have pressing appointments to keep, you know."
                        ],
                        "Drunken Duskwright": [
                                "Grrr ... If this were anywhere but the Druthers, I'd have that fool spittin' teeth before he formed a second word.",
                                "Thanks for steppin' in there, friend. Not that I couldn't handle myself against a bleatin' milksop like that bloke. And I don't want to cause no trouble for Buscarron. You know, havin' to mop up blood and bits o' teeth and the like."
                        ],
                        "Apathetic Porter": [
                                "Beg your pardon? You suspect that we porters have been planting draconian rosaries in House Haillenarte shipments!? What nerve! If you truly believe such nonsense, search our parcels and see what you find!",
                                "(yawn) Say what you will. My conscience is clear.",
                                "Are we finished? If so, I would appreciate an apology.",
                                "But ... but that's impossible! Once the knight at Whitebrim Front concluded her inspection, I loaded the parcels into the wagon myself! And if I had been the culprit, I would have never allowed you to search my shipments! Say what you will to Lord Haurchefant─I will not be held accountable for this!",
                                "(yawn) Say what you will. My conscience is clear."
                        ],
                        "Careless Imperial": [
                                "Did you hear about these insurgents? Apparently, they've got their eye on the castrum. Personally, I'd like to see them try to take it. It'd serve to lift the tedium. What do you want?"
                        ],
                        "Impassive Merchant": [
                                "Have I seen a masked man wearing a dark robe? No, I haven't, nor do I wish to. Business is bad enough without shady characters lurking about. Folk have been giving Highbridge a wide berth because of all the Qiqirn raids. None but the most devout of pilgrims are willing to come here anymore.",
                                "(sigh) Mayhap it's best I moved on ... Cut my losses before they drag me all the way down ... "
                        ],
                        "Unnerved Knight": [
                                "So fast ... so strong ... We were no match ... ",
                                "Curse those fiends! It's as though they knew we were coming ... "
                        ]
                },
                "Npcc": {
                        "Cross Imperial": [
                                "Get moving, you lot! The quicker we march, the sooner this will be over! You have no business being here! Begone or I will take you for an insurgent!"
                        ],
                        "Multiloquent Merchant": [
                                "Aye, I've heard tell of the masked devil. Seems he's been appearing not only around Highbridge, but elsewhere about Thanalan, too. Enough folk have reported seeing him to convince me he's more than a figment of the imagination, but little is known about him otherwise.",
                                "Enough folk have reported seeing him to convince me he's more than a figment of the imagination, but little is known about him otherwise.",
                                "Enough folk have reported seeing him to convince me he's more than a figment of the imagination, but little is known about him otherwise."
                        ],
                        "Unfit Knight": [
                                "(pant) (pant) Where ... where is Lord Francel? Please, you must find him!",
                                "Confound it all! How are we to redeem House Haillenarte if we cannot even slay a single aevis!? (sigh) We are fortunate you came along when you did, sir. House Haillenarte will remember your kindness.",
                                "Confound it all! How are we to redeem House Haillenarte if we cannot even slay a single aevis!? (sigh) We are fortunate you came along when you did, miss. House Haillenarte will remember your kindness."
                        ]
                },
                "Npcd": {
                        "Beleaguered Imperial": [
                                "All the coin I make doing this goes to the wife in the country. If it turns out she's been squandering it on fancy clothes and gewgaws, I will not be amused. Need ... sleep ... (snore)"
                        ]
                },
                "Npce": {
                        "Beguiled Imperial": [
                                "They say it's our duty to bring civilization to these lands, but what if these lands don't want civilizing? Trespassers will be dealt with severely. You have been warned."
                        ]
                },
                "Npcf": {
                        "Imperial Centurion": [
                                "From another patrol, are you? When next you see your commanding officer, tell him that he leads a sloppy unit. If any of my lot forgot to salute a superior officer, they would be on their arse faster than you can say “latrine duty.” One of our covert operatives, I take it? In or out of uniform, you would do well to remember your courtesies.",
                                "Carry on, soldier. ... Hm? Insurgents gathering to the east, you say? One of our covert operatives, are you? Carry on, soldier. ... Hm? Insurgents gathering to the east, you say? Judging by your description, they are well beyond the perimeter ... but I will not have it said that I was remiss. You, return to the scene and keep an eye on those insurgents. Should aught go awry, use your smoke signal to call us.",
                                "Give me strength ... If that was your idea of a salute, you can wave good-bye to that promotion right now.",
                                "Return to the scene and keep an eye on those insurgents. Should aught go awry, use your smoke signal to call us."
                        ]
                },
                "Poverty": {
                        "Hungry Beggar": [
                                "P-Please, sir, just leave me be ... ",
                                "P-Please, miss, just leave me be ... "
                        ],
                        "Devious Derelict": [
                                "I've nothing to say but this: Thal take who─or whatever's been feeding off us low folk."
                        ],
                        "Petrified Pauper": [
                                "Wh-What do you want from me!? I d–don't know anything, I swear! Please don't kill me!"
                        ]
                },
                "Resistancewarrior": {
                        "Resistance Fighter": [
                                "Commander! We've got a problem!",
                                "A mob's gathered outside headquarters, and they've started making demands. You'd best come and see for yourself!"
                        ],
                        "Resistance Captain": [
                                "I reckon that's the closest we're going to get to a compromise. And we will have people standing guard ... "
                        ]
                },
                "Resistance": {
                        "Liberation Front Infantry": [
                                "What you have to understand is that it was not a simple matter of numbers. The bulk of the XIIth never even took the field. It was Zenos's stratagems that won the war. They were unlike anything we had ever seen. His formations were unorthodox─bewildering. We honestly thought we had him on the back foot. One moment we were pressing home our advantage, the next we were surrounded and at his mercy. And then he stood before us, his cornered prey. Alone and unarmed. He beckoned us to come forward and fight for our lives. One by one, my comrades charged. Fearless and unflinching, he would dance amidst their blades for a time, and then draw close, as if to embrace ... One ... after ... another. He made us watch. Do you understand? He made us watch.",
                                " ... I do not think there was any joy in it. Nor justice, nor morality, nor meaning.",
                                " ... We all feel the same. But my lady, you must understand ... On the battlefield, reasons do not matter. The victor is not the just, but the strong, and the strong become the heroes of the tale. We were not strong enough. It is not sufficient to be right. To be just. Without strength, our path has but one end ... ",
                                "To think that warriors such as you journeyed across the seas to aid our cause ... We cannot thank you enough!",
                                "I want to shout and scream until my throat is hoarse. I want my fallen brothers and sisters to know that it was not in vain!"
                        ],
                        "Liberation Front Sentry": [
                                "Aye, the captain went outside some few bells ago─and looking quite unwell, I am sorry to say. This I mentioned to Lord Gosetsu, who straightways struck out after him. I hope they will be all right ... "
                        ]
                },
                "Serpent Officer": {
                        "Serpent Officer (Castrum Oriens)": [
                                "This will be our largest engagement yet. Our conjurers will do their utmost to provide support, but we must be prepared to suffer significant casualties."
                        ],
                        "Serpent Officer (Amarissaix's Spire)": [
                                "The Alliance holds the Wall, (Player's Grand Company Rank or Gender) . You may cross at your leisure.",
                                "Ah, the Scions of the Seventh Dawn. We were told to expect you. Shall I summon someone to escort you to the Wall?",
                                "The Alliance holds the Wall"
                        ],
                        "Serpent Officer (Call of the Sea)": [
                                "I pray your meeting with the Elder Seedseer went well, my lord envoy.",
                                "I pray your meeting with the Elder Seedseer went well, my lady envoy."
                        ]
                },
                "Serpentofficer": {
                        "Serpent Officer (Castrum Abania)": [
                                "I am told one of your comrades was injured during the operation. If there is aught we can do to help, pray do not hesitate to ask."
                        ],
                        "Serpent Officer (The Waking Sands)": [
                                "The Elder Seedseer speaks only truth, and her words have the power to touch the soul. At the sound of her voice, all fall silent and attend her.",
                                "I will not deny that I am disappointed, but I take comfort in the knowledge that individuals are permitted to transfer between Grand Companies. Know that the Order of the Twin Adder would be proud to have you should you undergo a change of heart.",
                                "I shall send word to the Adders' Nest so that our people know to expect you. Give your name to the personnel officer, and he will guide you through the formalities."
                        ],
                        "Serpent Officer (Ala Ghiri)": [
                                "Grim though it is, the conjurers have had no choice but to impose a rigid triage system when treating the wounded. Under the circumstances, we have to be realistic.",
                                "The Elder Seedseer has been informed. By the grace of the Matron, mayhap we can yet save more lives ... ",
                                "On behalf of the Elder Seedseer, I thank you for your swift and decisive action against the primal menace. We are not unaware of the danger it posed to our fair nation.",
                                "We have lost so many men already ... If we suffer another defeat like that, this campaign is over."
                        ],
                        "Serpent Officer (Castrum Oriens)": [
                                "A pleasure to meet you, (If(GreaterThan(PlayerParameter(53),0)))(If(LessThan(PlayerParameter(53),127)))(Clickable(<If(GreaterThan(PlayerParameter(52),0))) (Player's Grand Company Rank) )/> Surname (Else/) Forename (/If)(Else/) Forename (/If). I oversee Adder operations here in the Elder Seedseer's stead. Rest assured that our scouts were handpicked from the elite ranks of the Gods' Quiver and the Wood Wailers. If the imperials take so much as one step into East End, we will know.",
                                "This will be our largest engagement yet. Our conjurers will do their utmost to provide support, but we must be prepared to suffer significant casualties.",
                                "I have called upon Stillglade Fane to send every available conjurer, no matter how inexperienced, to help with the wounded. I pray it will be enough.",
                                "I swear to you, the imperials will not cross this wall again, on my honor as a man of the Twin Adder.",
                                "A pleasure to meet you, (If(GreaterThan(PlayerParameter(53)"
                        ],
                        "Serpent Officer (Porta Praetoria)": [
                                "The Matron smiles upon us this day with the safe return of you and your captured comrade. Such tidings are sure to raise the men's spirits.",
                                "I must admit, my Lominsan counterpart's enthusiasm is ... infectious. I find that I too am eager to see this so-called “Maelstrike” firsthand.",
                                "Resistance forces in the Ala Mhigan Quarter are ready and await our signal.",
                                "We have done all we can to prepare. For serenity, purity, sanctity. For serenity, purity, sanctity ... "
                        ]
                },
                "Storm Officer": {
                        "Storm Officer (MSQ)": [
                                "For an operation of this import, we cannot afford to hold too many in reserve. Surely the Maelstrom must take part in this assault!"
                        ],
                        "Storm Officer (Floating City of Nym)": [
                                "Don't worry, sir - I'll keep watch over the tower. Your place is in Ala Mhigo.",
                                ""
                        ]
                },
                "Stormofficer": {
                        "Storm Officer (The Waking Sands)": [
                                "When the Admiral speaks, even pirates listen, and that is no small thing. She is a born leader─the kind one would gladly follow to the seventh hell!",
                                "So you have decided to cast your lot with the Flames. Well, there is no help for it. Just remember that it's never too late to sign on with a different crew.",
                                "If your mind is made up, then there is no help for it. Yet know that like the tide, men's hearts are apt to change. If and when yours does, you may be certain of a warm welcome from us."
                        ],
                        "Storm Officer (MSQ)": [
                                "Mark my words: when this is over, I will take the heads of every officer in Castrum Abania. I'll swing the bloody axe myself if I have to!",
                                "Greetings and well met, (If(GreaterThan(PlayerParameter(52),0)))(If(LessThan(PlayerParameter(52),127)))(Clickable(<If(GreaterThan(PlayerParameter(52),0))) (Player's Grand Company Rank) )/> Surname (Else/) Forename (/If)(Else/) Forename (/If). I have been dispatched from Limsa Lominsa to command the Maelstrom forces here. This campaign has taken us quite far from the shores of Vylbrand. Though the logistics of a prolonged deployment have been the source of much consternation, I prefer to view it as an opportunity to strengthen ties with our allies, and to study their methods.",
                                "For an operation of this import, we cannot afford to hold too many in reserve. Surely the Maelstrom must take part in this assault!",
                                "How in Llymlaen's name did they find the Reach? I thought their glamours were impenetrable.",
                                "Whatever “rules of war” can be said to exist, that whoreson has broken them all. This will not stand!",
                                "Imperial scum! We will make them pay for this!",
                                "The imperials underestimated us once, and they paid dearly for it. They may not be so easily deceived next time─but if we cannot fool them, we will simply have to break them!",
                                "Well done securing the residential district! Ala Mhigo is nearly ours!",
                                "Heh heh, I can't wait to see Marshal Slafyrsyn in action! His Maelstrike is the stuff of legends!",
                                "Maelstrom, Adder, and Ishgardian forces are in position, General!",
                                "Hah hah! Till sea swallows all!",
                                "We will have our retribution. It is but a matter of time.",
                                "Greetings and well met, (If(GreaterThan(PlayerParameter(52),0"
                        ]
                },
                "Storm Private": {
                        "Storm Private (The Company You Keep)": [
                                "Is that my blood? Oh, bollocks ... ",
                                "Sir!",
                                "Sir! We've received a report from a lookout in lower La Noscea, sir! Imperial forces have fired upon a Highwind Skyways airship. The vessel is in a bad way, sir, and appears to be banking for an emergency landing in Cedarwood."
                        ],
                        "Storm Private (Maelstrom)": [
                                "Apologies for the wait.",
                                "Still no change, I'm afraid. He just stands there in silence until we move him."
                        ]
                },
                "Yellowjacket": {
                        "Yellowjacket (Roegadyn)": [
                                "You there─adventurer. You sailed in on the last ferry, did you not? The captain reported being attacked by a pirate vessel. And several witnesses have testified independently that a passenger matching your description went out on deck mere moments before the incident took place. Sending your friends signals, were you?",
                                " ... Is that right? Ahem. You are surely aware of the recent kidnappings? Respectfully, then, we cannot be too trusting of outsiders at a time when the loyalty of even our closest friends is in doubt.",
                                "Not a watered-down cup of piss like last time, I should hope?",
                                "Commodore, sir!",
                                "It's the Sahagin, sir! They've mounted a large-scale assault on South Tidegate, and threaten to overwhelm our defenses within the day. The garrison requests immediate reinforcements."
                        ],
                        "Yellowjacket (Sastasha Seagrot)": [
                                "The fishbacks and their Serpent Reaver lackeys cannot be allowed to establish a permanent base in these lands. You must uncover the truth behind who or what is lurking in these caves, adventurer. The peace of western La Noscea may depend on it!"
                        ]
                },
                "Inconspicuous Man": {
                        "Shadowy Woman": [
                                "What? Didn't your mammy teach you it's rude to stare?"
                        ]
                },
                "Shadowy Woman": {
                        "Inconspicuous Man": [
                                " ... Hm? Got business with me, 'venturer? So you're the man the Admiral sent word of. I was hopin' I might catch a glimpse of Thancred, too─been a while since I saw his shite-eatin' grin. But what with all the doe–eyed wenches about, I 'spect he's got his hands full. Ah, and you must be the Far Easterner what Merlwyb says wants to train with us. Welcome to Limsa, milady!",
                                " ... Hm? Got business with me, 'venturer? So you're the woman the Admiral sent word of. I was hopin' I might catch a glimpse of Thancred, too─been a while since I saw his shite-eatin' grin. But what with all the doe–eyed wenches about, I 'spect he's got his hands full. Ah, and you must be the Far Easterner what Merlwyb says wants to train with us. Welcome to Limsa, milady!",
                                "You're not the first person to say that, lass. Limsa's a city of pirates, to be sure, and pirates don't give two farts about keepin' a spotless reputation. They hardly need a secret society to do their dirty work. Might be as my people and I keep to the shadows, but we've got nothin' to be ashamed of. It's simply better for business that we remain unseen.",
                                "Then what in the seven hells are we waitin' for? If you'd come with us, Yugerry of Do–whatsit, we can get acquainted in more private surrounds ... Hah, that didn't come out right, did it!?"
                        ]
                },
                "Minfilia Warde": {
                        "Ryne": [
                                "I wish ... I wish I'd never ... ",
                                "Would it be all right if I joined you?",
                                "Thank you. She means a great deal to the Night's Blessed, doesn't she?",
                                "To show reverence to the Dark?",
                                "I thought Master Matoya kept her room dark because she didn't need the light, but they're all like hers, aren't they ... ",
                                "We mustn't be rude to our hosts.",
                                "I'm not sure, to be honest. Not refreshed, exactly, but I do feel different. Has this water been treated in some way?",
                                "I wouldn't say it was an unpleasant sensation, but I too felt something strange.",
                                "Is there a handshake or gesture we should know too? I would hate to offend anyone.",
                                "Everyone was so kind and gracious ... I was nervous at first, but already I'm starting to feel at home. There is still much I have to learn about the Night's Blessed, but their faith and strength of will is nothing short of inspiring. I can see now how they've built such a thriving community ... ",
                                "What do I need help with? Hmmm ... ",
                                "I can see now how they've come to thrive in these woods, even with all the sin eaters.",
                                "May I help too?",
                                "Right, then. I'll fill, you water! This was the only jug I could find which was small enough to lift, but I'm afraid there's a crack in the bottom. You'll need to hurry to the garden before all the water leaks out. Oh no, did all the water leak out? Here, let me refill it for you. Was there enough water for the plot? Only half? I see. Well, let me refill the jug for you. All done? Then we just need to speak to ... Ersabel, was it?",
                                "Is there anything else we can do to help? We could plant something if you like.",
                                "I don't know how you manage ... Have the Blessed not considered leaving? Life would surely be easier almost anywhere else.",
                                "Ah, er ... yes, I believe so. The Night's Blessed was initially formed by those who lost their homes in the wake of the Flood.",
                                "With so many seeking paradise in Eulmore, it's refreshing to find people who value a humbler existence.",
                                " ... To keep their legacy alive.",
                                "Thancred and I have come across these ruined churches before. I wish I could've seen them before the Flood. The windows were works of art, I'm told ... ",
                                "I've seen no sign of the church, but it must be around here somewhere ... ",
                                "It's surprisingly intact. What little is left of the churches I've seen until now has always borne the scars of decades of disuse.",
                                "I can barely see my hand in front of my face. If only that torch were a little closer ... ",
                                "How were you able to see it in the dark? And inside the altar of all places ... ",
                                "Is Y'shtola the conjurer you and Urianger used to talk about?",
                                "It's nice of them to worry about us ... but we really need those shoes.",
                                "I heard a fearsome roar ... Is everything all right?",
                                "If only I hadn't been caught ... ",
                                "We lost sight of you. Is everything all right?",
                                "I won't return to Eulmore! And I won't let you hurt my friends!",
                                "Does that mean you won't aid us against the sin eaters?",
                                "I'm going to train harder. Having seen what you've achieved, it's the least I can do.",
                                "Oh ... er, no need to worry about me. I'm quite familiar with the manor.",
                                "During our wanderings, Thancred and I would often return here. It's where I imbue his ammunition.",
                                "I dare not ask what happened in our absence ... ",
                                "I can sense her presence, albeit faintly. Come on, let's look over by the crystal wall.",
                                "She was here. On the top of this building ... ",
                                "Is this─",
                                "This place ... You ... You're ... ",
                                "I've lost count of the times I've almost given up. If people hadn't helped me every step of the way, I never would have made it.",
                                "To defeat the sin eaters, and bring this world back from the brink! The remaining Wardens have hidden themselves from us. But with the power of the Oracle, I thought we might be able to find them ... ",
                                "The Flood has washed away so much of this world. So many people and places and possibilities─and all the heroes who fought to protect them. Yet here the Scions are, trying so, so hard to help those few of us who remain.",
                                "Thank you, Minfilia, for believing in us. For believing in me.",
                                "(groan) What happened? I remember speaking with Minfilia ... and then ... Is something wrong?",
                                "A parting gift, I think. Until now, I've walked the path she set before me. The path she set before all the Minfilias.",
                                "I'd like to think so too, but ... (sigh)",
                                "(sigh) I know there's no getting around it, but ... ",
                                "Would you mind going on ahead? I'll be right behind you. I promise.",
                                "I just ... need a moment to think.",
                                "I know I haven't exactly been pulling my weight up till now, but that's all going to change, starting today. I'll do whatever it takes─whatever it takes to make Minfilia's dream a reality. I can track the Lightwardens now. Maybe even help you fight them.",
                                "You don't have to say that, you know ... ",
                                "I'm sorry, I don't. I couldn't have been very old when it happened.",
                                "Our only path forward lies ahead─I'm sure of it. So ... onward, I suppose!",
                                "In which case, you all must be familiar with the local roads, correct? We're on our way to Nabaath Areng, ourselves. If we continue south from here, will we have any difficulties reaching it?",
                                "Oh, no ... But surely there must be some way. Do you think any of the other Mord might have some sort of hidden route?",
                                "Wonderful! Thank you for your help.",
                                "I've got it! I'll lead by asking how business is, then mention you, and then ask about the route. That ... should work, right?",
                                "(sniff) I'm fine. Really. It's just been a long day.",
                                "Then we can finally go to Nabaath Areng.",
                                "Before we go ... While you were away with Forename , I prepared an extra set of cartridges for you. And this one. It's the practice cartridge you gave me. I know I should've thrown it away ages ago, but I've been adding a little extra to it every day. After so many charges, I'm honestly not sure what it will do. But I wanted you to have it. For luck.",
                                "We should hurry. Magnus and the others are probably wondering where we are.",
                                "So this is it. We're finally going to Nabaath Areng.",
                                "Urianger?",
                                "Ah, Urianger ... Thank you. For everything.",
                                "No! I won't ... ! I won't let you!",
                                "I don't know about the world ... but I never asked to be saved.",
                                "Thancred, no─",
                                "This is the place, Forename . This is where she stopped the Flood. The last time I was here, when I felt her presence overwhelming me ... I tried to pretend it wasn't happening─to just ... turn away. But I can't turn away now. Not this time. For Thancred and the others, I have to face her.",
                                "Sorry I couldn't be of more help. By the sounds of it, you have a knack for handling strange requests. On the bright side, Urianger taught me a lot about the Talos and their hearts. I think I can help if they need further repairs.",
                                "I shouldn't be here. I don't deserve to be. I don't deserve any of the things you've done for me! I'm just a burden, helpless and hopeless. If tomorrow came and I was gone, it would be better for everyone! Thancred most of all. He'll never admit it, but I can see it in his eyes ... I wish he'd just say it─just say that he hates me! That he wishes I was dead so that she could return ... ",
                                "(sniff) I'm fine. Really. It's just been a long day.",
                                "Runar. Thank goodness.",
                                "You have something on your mind. What is it?",
                                "Do you really think he can bring her back?",
                                "Urianger once told me that being immersed in the Lifestream can cause irreparable harm to the body. Do you suppose Y'shtola is all right?",
                                "Thancred mentioned Y'shtola's passion for learning. I expect the tablet is ... just the sort of thing she'd like?",
                                "I know I have no reason to, but I can't help feeling nervous about meeting Y'shtola.",
                                "If ... if you really want to stay, then help us fight.",
                                "Thancred has told me of the Ascians and what they have done. If he isn't willing to help, is it wise to let him stay with us?",
                                "Urianger said they were rebuilding, but ... there's no one here.",
                                "I didn't expect her to be so ... imposing in person.",
                                "Have you ever seen such a tree? To think these are only the roots!",
                                "He understands that I'm not the same. That I'm not her.",
                                "Is─is everyone all right? What in the─",
                                "Where ... where is Y'shtola?",
                                "Why would she do such a thing?",
                                "Let me come with you! I have the blessing too!",
                                "I wish there were more I could do. Please be careful ... ",
                                "Oh! I'm sorry. I was ... stuck in my own head again. It's clear that Magnus has no intention of helping us, but perhaps we should ask the other residents? They may know something of the trolley. I'll take the north side of town. Let me know if you learn anything!",
                                "Considering the Blessed have only just recovered from their encounter with the Eulmorans, Thancred and the others thought we should stay a while longer to be sure they're all right. They're such a kind and caring people. I pray they never again have to face such hardship.",
                                "Thanks to the antidote, all those who were poisoned will make a full recovery.",
                                "I know he said he would be watching from the shadows, but doesn't it seem wrong to leave without at least telling Emet-Selch?",
                                "A quest for a lost love ... Perhaps that could have been me, had things been different.",
                                "The town is small, but everything in it seems so purposeful. It's amazing.",
                                " ... No. We must reach Nabaath Areng. I must.",
                                "He only said that because ... because he thinks I'm weak. And he's right. But I can't be─I won't be forever. There has to be some way ... I must find it.",
                                " ... ",
                                "Eep! Oh, Forename . What are you doing here?",
                                "Thancred ... It's my fault, you know. I jumped at the chance to help Lyna, but I was careless. And now ... It's my fault.",
                                "I ... are you sure? I've brought him nothing but trouble thus far. And what if it's worse, next time? All I do is make mistakes, put others in danger ... I'm sure that he'll resent me. For being this weak. Maybe he already does.",
                                "Oh, what have I done? I promised I'd be right back, and yet here I am ... I know that I need to be better. I'm only allowed to be a part of this because I'm Minfilia, and I need to be ... more like her. All I do is make mistakes, put others in danger ... ",
                                "But you're right. I can still help─if only by seeing these herbs safely to Chessamile.",
                                "I asked someone who looked like they knew what they were doing, and they pointed me toward the herb I was looking for right away! I hope you didn't have too much trouble with yours.",
                                "(gasp)",
                                "I-I wasn't spying on you or anything. I've just finished my task, and ... ",
                                "I ... I should go and report back.",
                                "What do you suppose she's gleaned from the tablet?",
                                "And you think this ancient petition will somehow help us get into Yx'Maja?",
                                "Where can we find this monument?",
                                " ... All right. I'll stay here until you return.",
                                "Take care, Forename .",
                                "Why would she do such a thing?",
                                "What about Y'shtola ... ?",
                                "All right.",
                                "If I were stronger ... how many people would still be alive?",
                                "The Wardens harbor vast reservoirs of primordial Light, do they not?",
                                "Don't what? Do what I can? What we both know is right!?",
                                "But I do! I know why you never said anything. Because you thought you could keep me safe by keeping me in the dark. And ... maybe I thought so too. But I knew, Thancred. I always knew!",
                                "I'm sorry to be so insistent. But I know this is the only way. If you're willing to give me a chance, come with us.",
                                "Sorry for the wait─I'm ready now.",
                                "Look ... no matter what happens to me, I'm sure that I don't want to go back to being who I was.",
                                "Thank you. I'll try not to disappoint.",
                                "We'll need to move quickly. The longer the others need to keep the Eulmorans busy, the more likely they are to be caught.",
                                "I'm ready. Let's go.",
                                "This place has been scarred by the Flood too. Who can say what lies ahead?",
                                "Urianger once told me that being immersed in the Lifestream can cause irreparable harm to the body.",
                                "I can't imagine what could have survived in there after so many years ... ",
                                "To think we'll be the first people in thousands of years to set foot inside this place. It's humbling. Knowing they've entrusted us with the history of their people. With their legacy ... ",
                                "The Lightwarden is dead. The Blessed's prayers have been answered ... ",
                                "How can you tell?",
                                "You recognize these scenes?",
                                "Thancred did tell me about primals ... but I don't fully understand what all of this means.",
                                "Oh dear ... Is there anything else that we should know?",
                                "Forgive me ... but I'm not sure I understand ... ",
                                "They're so fluffy, it's like touching a cloud!",
                                "I dare not ask what happened in our absence ... ",
                                "I was taught never to talk to the Fuath under any circumstances ... Are you sure this is a good idea ... ?",
                                "I can swim well enough. Thancred taught me.",
                                "I can fight too. I promise I won't be a burden.",
                                "E-Excuse me, Forename , but I couldn't help overhearing. If you mean to undertake this task, will you let me accompany you?",
                                "I would learn from you ... and help in what little way I can.",
                                "Thank you so much!",
                                "Thank you! I promise I won't be a burden!",
                                "Father Collard's Chambers is through here. I peered inside, and sure enough, it was milling with Nu Mou. They looked none too friendly.",
                                "If Thancred were here, he'd tell me to go about it quietly and quickly. Let us split up.",
                                "I'll find all the ink I can and then come back outside. See you shortly, Forename .",
                                "I hope you've had more luck than I ... ",
                                " ... It would be them! Thank you, you've been a great help!",
                                "What a sight ... Oh, pardon me! It's only ... It's a bit daunting, isn't it?",
                                "This lever can't have been designed for a person to operate ... ",
                                "The levers for switching tracks looked like they were in good condition",
                                "I feel a bit bad for them ... ",
                                "Um, if I may─we're actually searching for a means by which to travel to Nabaath Areng.",
                                "Well, is there anything we could do to assist you?",
                                "I hope Jeryk doesn't get in trouble for telling us what happened.",
                                "This is all my fault. I never should have pressured him.",
                                "She's not gone. No matter what you say or believe, she's not. We can still bring her back.",
                                "Why must he always treat me like this ... ",
                                "I'm going to train harder. Having seen what you've achieved, it's the least I can do.",
                                "All seems well, thank goodness ... ",
                                "So that was an Ascian ... Thancred told me about them.",
                                "For a moment, I was worried they wouldn't accept the seal.",
                                "Thirty? But that would mean ... How old are you, exactly?",
                                "Did you have any luck speaking with the Viis?",
                                "Urianger once told me a story about the pixies.",
                                "They're born from the souls of those who died as children, or so it's believed.",
                                "Though they don't have memories of their previous lives, the desire to have fun remains, imprinted on their souls.",
                                "And so they live only to play, keeping hapless mortals for their pleasure for years on end. Sometimes even until death ... ",
                                "I hope Feo Ul will be able to help us.",
                                "Feo Ul certainly has a way with the other pixies.",
                                "It's been quite a while. I hope Urianger is well.",
                                "Forename ! You'll be glad to know that the locals have all taken shelter.",
                                "I'm staying with you!",
                                "There are so many ... ",
                                "Lyna! Lyna, hold on!",
                                "Thancred!"
                        ]
                },
                "Balloon": {
                        "Hateful Harrier": ["Sodding bluecoats!"],
                        "Sahagin Enemy": [
                                "Pshhh! Intrudersss! You shall not passssss! Summon reinforcementsss! You will pay with your livesss!",
                                "For Lord Leviathan!"
                        ],
                        "Unknown Ravager": [
                                "Guards!? No matter. Kill 'em all! I ain't dyin' in this godsforsaken 'ell'ole!"
                        ],
                        "6th Cohort Enemies": [
                                "Come for the maiden fair, eh? Intruder detected! You'll not leave this place alive! Sound the alarm!",
                                "All units, engage and destroy!"
                        ],
                        "Heretics": [
                                "Ware this one!",
                                "Oi, over here!",
                                "Your end is come ... The cold salves my pain ... Surrender the crystals ... My life belongs to the Lady ... "
                        ],
                        "Serpent Reaver": ["Looky 'ere, lads! Fresh meat fer the larder!"],
                        "Aggressive Refugees": [
                                "Help me, dammit! You should never have come here! W-We can take him! I c-can't do this alone!",
                                "Help me, dammit! You should never have come here! W-We can take her! I c-can't do this alone!",
                                "Do yer worst! (huff) (puff) You won't stop us! You can't stop us!",
                                "Ho, a challenge! It's been too long! Meddlesome wretch! Bastard!",
                                "Ho, a challenge! It's been too long! Meddlesome wretch! Bitch!",
                                "Enough! No, NO!"
                        "Hunter1": [
                                "I just don't know what to make of it.",
                                "Not just that—what if you slip up?"
                        ],
                        "Hunter2": ["Not worth the risk."],
                        "Gladiolus": [
                                "So, you my backup?",
                                "Anyway, place is crawling with daemons.",
                                "Save the talk. We got hunting to do. Now, if we're done with the introductions, follow me.",
                                "There they are. You ready to rumble?",
                                "Some pretty fancy moves you've got there. Reminds me of a certain king I know.",
                                "You think so?",
                                "I ain't one to leave unfinished business. Can't speak for him, though.",
                                "Well, how 'bout you prove it?",
                                "Think so.",
                                "When have I ever?",
                                "Will do. Now, let's scram."
                        ],
                        "Melusine Hunter": [
                                "Hey there, \"brother.\"",
                                "Don't act so surprised. I know a fellow Hunter when I see one.",
                                "And, as my \"brother\"... I was hoping you might take care of a little problem for me—a problem named \"Melusine.\"",
                                "A real pretty lady who appears at the Vesperpool",
                                "Attaboy. Good luck!",
                                "Damn, that was quick. I knew I could count on you, \"brother.\"",
                                "... Sadly, it does.",
                                "Because I'm the one who wrote it.",
                                "Ex-partner. We had it out a couple of times, and one night she just up and left.",
                                "Now I know why she never wrote back.",
                                "Well, what's done is done—and thanks to you, her killer has been brought to justice."
                        ]
                },
                "???": {
                        "Talcott": ["Uh..."],
                        "Iedolas": [
                                "The ring...",
                                "Thieves cannot escape the hand of justice."
                        ]
                },
                "Proprietor": {
                        "Proprietor (Wishing Birds)": [
                                "They're launching wishing birds. Would you boys like to give it a try?",
                                "They're an old Altissian tradition."
                        ],
                        "Proprietor (Delivery)": [
                                "Y'all came all the way out here to deliver the goods?"
                        ]
                },
                
                        "Cor": ["\"Do you dare risk all"],
                        "Sania": [
                                "\"Ooh, this specimen is ",
                                "\"Back so soon?",
                                "\"There you are"
                        ],
                        "Luna": [
                                "If you know of any who are bedridden, or unable to come to me",
                                "It would be selfish of me to complain",
                                "Though I am still young, my blood",
                                "When war has ended, so too will suffering subside"
                        ],
                        "Radio Interviewer": [
                                "I understand you have a message for us?",
                                "Is it hard giving blessings?",
                                "What is your opinion of the treaty?"
                        ],
                        "Radio Narrator": [
                                "That marked the ascension",
                                "In time, her strength",
                                "The world watched on with worry"
                        ]
                        "Chocobo trainer": [
                                "All right! You crossed the finish line!",
                                "Hey, you've got to pass between me and my chocobo!"
                        ]
                },
                "Priest": {
                        "ACTION": ["(As Mintywolf points out"],
                        "Besaid Temple Summoner": [
                                "Lord Braska, Lady Yocun ... Lord Ohalland, and Lord Gandof.",
                                "Only sworn guardians may approach the Cloister of Trials.",
                                "Putting your transgression aside for now, let us celebrate the birth of a summoner!",
                                "Perhaps your transgression shall be pardoned on account of the toxin.",
                                "The Crusaders are planning an operation that defies the teachings of Yevon.",
                                "You look better than you did yesterday.",
                                "The summoner undergoes the trials.",
                                "I've not told the people yet, but I hear Maester Mika has passed away.",
                                "This ship of the air, could it be an Al Bhed machina?"
                        ],
                        "Purple-Clad Priest": [
                                "Infidel! Prepare to charge! (summons Dark Valefor)"
                        ],
                        "Kilika Priest": [
                                "I must reluctantly admit that the people are distancing themselves from the temple.",
                                "I hear Bevelle was devastated by Sin."
                        ],
                        "Monk in Luca": [
                                "Some of Luca's residents are making light of the teachings. What sacrilege."
                        ]
                },
                "Shopkeeper": {
                        "Merchant": [
                                "Welcome! Thank you! Come again!",
                                "You're going with Lady Yuna? Does that mean you're a guardian?",
                                "You're saving it for the tournament then!",
                                "If there's anything you need to know about guardians, ask Lulu.",
                                "I hope your toxin wears off soon."
                        ]
                },
                "Innkeeper": {
                        "Kilika Innkeeper": [
                                "M'lady Summoner!",
                                "Did you rest well? The others left some time ago.",
                                "We're still cleaning up here. Uh ... Shouldn't you be on your way?",
                                "We're still cleaning up here.",
                                "We're still cleaning up."
                        ],
                        "Djose Innkeeper": [
                                "This inn belongs to Djose Temple. Will you be staying with us for the night?",
                                "Welcome to the Djose Temple Inn."
                        ],
                        "Guado Innkeeper": [
                                "The Guado welcome all guests. Would you like to rest here?",
                                "Then let me show you a Guado's hospitality.",
                                "Very well. Come back anytime.",
                                "Oh? You want to rest here?",
                                "Very well. I know about you",
                                "He that is too secure is not safe"
                        ],
                        "Maechen": ["Can't get enough? Like to hear it one more time?"],
                        "Mifurey": [
                                "Ah, Lady Summoner. Yes, just over that way.",
                                "Welcom to Rin Travel Agency! We have a wide selection of quality merchandise to choose from."
                        ],
                        "Macalania Innkeeper": [
                                "Welcome to the Lake Macalania branch of Rin's Travel Agency, now Spira-wide! Thank you for your patronage! Please use our other agencies in your travels!"
                        ]
                },
                "Gatekeeper": {
                        "Dome Gatekeeper": [
                                "But fear not. Lady Yunalesca will show you the path. The Final Aeon will be yours. The summoner and the Final Aeon will join powers. Go to her now. Inside, the lady awaits. (Makes symbol of Yevon and vanishes)"
                        ]
                },
                "Gatekeeper in priest's outfit": "Dome Gatekeeper",
                "Blond Guy (Observation Deck)": {
                        "Bahamut's Fayth": ["Well?"]
                },
                "Crusader": {
                        "Crusader in gold and rust": [
                                "We'll defeat Sin any way we can!",
                                "Enough! (Storms off)"
                        ],
                        "Crusader guarding Kilika temple steps": ["You shall not pass!"],
                        "Crusader in Stadium": ["I'm off duty. Let me be."],
                        "Crusader in yellow and purple (fork)": [
                                "The command center is strategically located on a ledge overlooking the sea.",
                                "We have neutralized all fiends around the command center."
                        ]
                },
                "Yuna": {
                        "Epitaphs": ["Rest in peace. A peaceful death."]
                },
                "Another pompous harpist": {
                        "Guard in Monks' Chamber": [
                                "Both Guado and human blood flow through Maester Seymour's veins. This mixed heritage caused him a deal of grief in his childhood. But because of that very experience ... he grew to become a great leader who aspired to bring Guado and humans together in friendship.",
                                "Lord Braska vanquished Sin when Lord Seymour was about your age. During the celebration of the Calm's arrival, Maester Mika ordained Lord Jyscal a maester of Yevon. He praised Lord Jyscal's achievements, including the conversion of the Guado to the teachings of Yevon. Maester Seymour was still a young lad then, but he tried hard to assist Lord Jyscal.",
                                "As a monk, Maester Seymour soon distinguished himself. His accomplishments were many and acclaimed by all. He shot up through the ranks quickly, he did. Aye, he rose high on his own, never riding Lord Jyscal's coattails. He's truly a remarkable young man.",
                                "As a summoner, Maester Seymour's strength is matchless. Yet, he became a maester of Yevon instead of undertaking the pilgrimage to battle Sin. I think he believes that there's more to a summoner's duty than just destroying Sin.",
                                "Don't you hold back now."
                        ]
                },
                "Warrior monks on stadium end of causeway": {
                        "Male warrior monk on stadium end of causeway": [
                                "What do you say we ditch",
                                "Hmph! That's the problem",
                                "We're in sunny Luca now"
                        ],
                        "Female warrior monk on stadium end of causeway": [""]
                },
                "Crusader plus warrior monk at bar": {
                        "Crusader at bar": [
                                "With Operation",
                                "What?",
                                "It may",
                                "-What?",
                                "-It may"
                        ],
                        "Warrior monk at bar": [""]
                },
                "Woman plus girl conversing on bench near reporter/cameraman": {
                        "Woman 1 conversing on bench near reporter": [
                                "I was really surprised",
                                "-I'm keeping a close eye",
                                "-I like how they",
                                "-The Ronso?",
                                "What? The Besaid",
                                "-So, how did those fiends",
                                "Who knows what would"
                        ],
                        "Woman 2 conversing on bench near reporter": [""]
                },
                "Woman plus girl conversing on bench near reporter": {
                        "Woman 1 conversing on bench near reporter": [
                                "I was really surprised",
                                "-I'm keeping a close eye",
                                "-I like how they",
                                "-The Ronso?",
                                "What? The Besaid",
                                "-So, how did those fiends",
                                "Who knows what would"
                        ],
                        "Woman 2 conversing on bench near reporter": [""]
                },
                "Woman plus girl conversing near reporter": {
                        "Woman 1 conversing on bench near reporter": [
                                "I was really surprised",
                                "-I'm keeping a close eye",
                                "-I like how they",
                                "-The Ronso?",
                                "What? The Besaid",
                                "-So, how did those fiends",
                                "Who knows what would"
                        ],
                        "Woman 2 conversing on bench near reporter": [""]
                },
                "Soldier and boy fighting": {
                        "Soldier fighting with boy": [
                                "-Come on! Swing like a man!",
                                "-Okay, come on now! Pretend I'm a fiend!"
                        ],
                        "Boy fighting with soldier": [
                                "-I'm gonna beat Sin!",
                                "-Die, die, die!"
                        ]
                },
                "Little beaky guy and Al Bhed in a red vest": {
                        "Little beaky guy": [
                                "-The fiends were the Al Bhed's doing!",
                                "-Yeah, I guess you're right.",
                                "So, basically, you don't know anything, huh?"
                        ],
                        "Al Bhed in a red vest": [
                                "-What're you saying? You know the Al Bhed use machina!",
                                "The fiends were the Crusaders' doing!"
                        ]
                },
                "Pair of warrior monks near Stadium": {
                        "Warrior monk near stadium 1": [
                                "-Let him go. Even the two of us",
                                "-Our duties? We missed the ship to Bevelle",
                                "We wear the armor of the temple"
                        ],
                        "Warrior monk near stadium 2": [""]
                },
                "Man plus woman talking at stadium end": {
                        "Mainlander": ["-The Aurochs won the tournament"],
                        "Woman talking on stadium end of causeway": [""]
                },
                "Guy in red shorts": {
                        "Portly man with woman (mainland end)": [
                                "-Is it true that",
                                "-At this rate",
                                "I just wish"
                        ]
                },
                "Man plus woman talking on stadium end of causeway": {
                        "Mainlander": [
                                "-I wonder how",
                                "-Psshhh!",
                                "-But you know",
                                "Oh, yeah?"
                        ],
                        "Woman talking on stadium end of causeway": [""]
                },
                "Frog drummer": {
                        "Beaky guy on left": [
                                "Just as the name implies, it is a sphere that plays music, performed by the Yevon Musical Troupe. Each sphere contains one song. You will also need to use the audiovisual control panel found in the main hall. So, would you like to purchase a memento of your travels?",
                                "Please come again."
                        ],
                        "Beaky guy on right": [
                                "Excellent. Please close your eyes and concentrate. Let's see how many images you can currently record onto Movie Spheres. Ahh ... Looks like #. You don't have enough Gil, sir.",
                                "it captures the moment, so to speak. However, the Movie Sphere differs mainly in that it records images from the past rather than the present. You will also need to use the audiovisual control panel found in the main hall. So, would you like to purchase a memento of your travels?",
                                "Please come again."
                        ],
                        "Lady behind counter": ["Please come again."],
                        "Daraya": [
                                "If it's our music you want to hear, then go to the back and buy a sphere!"
                        ]
                },
                "Guard at lefthand exit": {
                        "O'aka": [
                                "Hey, lad. I appreciate yer offer, but ye ain't got enough Gil.",
                                "Blimey, lad! Will ye actually lend me X Gil?"
                        ],
                        "Guard (Dock 2)": [
                                "A ferry bound for Kilika is anchored here at dock number 2.",
                                "The ferry docked here is headed for Kilika Port."
                        ]
                },
                "Woman": {
                        "Woman talking on mainland side of causeway": [
                                "The Crusaders are blustering on about destroying Sin, but, heh ... I doubt they will."
                        ],
                        "Kilika Innkeeper": [
                                "Our loved ones ... We feared they would become fiends!"
                        ],
                        "Grieving Woman": [
                                "I hope you live your next life in a world without Sin."
                        ],
                        "Al Bhed woman in bumblebee-striped robe": [
                                "I will check over here."
                        ]
                },
                "Little girl": {
                        "Calli": ["You're a summoner?", "I'm Calli."],
                        "Yuna's little friend": ["Lady Yuna, come play with me some more!"],
                        "Kulukan's little sister": [
                                "(Weeping)",
                                "(Gives Yevon bow and runs off)",
                                "I'm gonna grow up to be a blitzer just like my sister!"
                        ],
                        "Little girl (aspiring sailor)": [
                                "This guard is so mean! He won't let me in to see Sir Graav!",
                                "I don't care if I have to wait for hours!",
                                "I hope Sir Graav's not hurt ...",
                                "Big boats, small boats, gotta love 'em all!",
                                "I want to be a sailor and sail all over Spira when I grow up."
                        ]
                },
                "Al Bhed in red vest": {
                        "Little beaky guy": [
                                "-The fiends were the Al Bhed's doing! They're out to get the temples!",
                                "-Yeah, I guess you're right.",
                                "The fiends were the Crusaders' doing! They're out to sabotoage the tournament!",
                                "-Yeah, I agree."
                        ],
                        "Al Bhed in bright red vest": [
                                "Sin is lurking in the waters nearby."
                        ]
                },
                "The young guns believe everything will go as planned. We veterans know otherwise": {
                        "Crusader in green (Mi'ihen)": [
                                "it's not going to be easy.",
                                "Of course when the time comes, we'll march in full force to victory. Victory must be the goal to win any battle.",
                                "They say luck decides the battle, but we can't afford to lose.",
                                "The young guns believe everything will go as planned. We veterans know otherwise"
                        ]
                },
                "Weaver": {
                        "Journeyman weaver": [
                                "Well, the last summoner almost ...",
                                "Ah, my apologies."
                        ]
                },
                "Monster Arena Guy": {


                        ],
                        "Tidus": [
                                "Sorry, no time for that.",
                                "All right, I'll do it!",
                                "Would you explain that again?"
                        ]
                },
                "Old man": {
                        "Monster Arena Guy": [
                                "Wowzers!",
                                "Thanks to you",
                                "You've captured",
                                "I've just got",
                                "You've beaten my",
                                "I've done",
                                "I've been researching",
                                "You beat him",
                                "What? You lost?",
                                "Awww. Not up to it?",
                                "Hmm ... And I was thinking to",
                                "That's the spirit, sonny!",
                                "So far, you've collected",
                                "Ah! You've caught all the fiends",
                                "Now what?"
                        ],
                        "ACTION": [
                                "Obtained Nirvana!",
                                "The Celestial Mirror seems to react.",
                                "It won't open."
                        ],
                        "Gramps": [
                                "Lady Yuna! Be careful!",
                                "Some wild youngsters are saying the Aurochs won after a 23-year losing streak!",
                                "Looks like you got over the toxin. Praise be to Yevon, eh?",
                                "We Besaiders all know Lady Yuna's no traitor.",
                                "I think I'll stick around long enough to see Sin get what's coming to it! Heh!"
                        ],
                        "Kilika Old Man": [
                                "This is my home, and no matter how bad it gets, I ain't movin'.",
                                "Repairs to the village are going well, but it'll take more than wood to repair the hearts of the people.",
                                "I ain't leaving my home. Nope. Never, I tell you.",
                                "The people of Kilika are used to destruction. It's nothing new."
                        ],
                        "Former Blitzer": [
                                "Climbing those stone steps every day has kept me in shape.",
                                "I used to be a blitzer back in my day.",
                                "I recognize your face, sonny. You were here praying for victory, right?",
                                "Not many visitors at the temple these days. It is a pity, really."
                        ],
                        "Old Man by shoopuf": [
                                "Sin took my daughter, but I just saw her again for the first time in five years.",
                                "I've seen my daughter, so I have no regrets."
                        ]
                },
                "Guado": {


                        ],
                        "First Guado": [
                                "Halt!",
                                "Lord Seymour's commands must be obeyed. You will come!"
                        ],
                        "Guado outside Macalania Temple": [
                                "Fool! To come back to Macalanaia Temple a traitor!"
                        ]
                },
                "Bird Harpist": {


                                "Hey there",
                                "Amazing. I can say",
                                "Our ancestors received"
                        ],
                        "Borra": [
                                "The butterfly that changes color attracts the red and blue butterflies."
                        ]
                },
                ")": {
                        "Portly man with woman (mainland end)": [
                                "-Is it true that the ferry is out of service?",
                                "-At this rate, who knows when we'll make it back to Kilika?"
                        ],
                        "Woman talking on mainland side of causeway": [
                                "-I hear Sin may still be lurking in the sea nearby."
                        ],
                        "Nedus": ["Nothing beats blitz! I wish you luck."],
                        "Wedge": [
                                "I'm right by the stadium, but I can't watch the game. What a bummer ...",
                                "Did you forget something inside? Give it up. I doubt you'll find it."
                        ],
                        "Biggs": [
                                "The first match has already begun. Please hurry to your seat.",
                                "We are currently assessing the damage from the fiends. No admittance."
                        ]
                },
                "Another guy in yellow pants": {
                        "Yet Another guy in yellow pants": [
                                "All of Zanarkand's watching now, so put on a show for 'em!",
                                "Show them what blitzball's all about!"
                        ]
                },
                "Helmsman": {


                                "Oh, what a great day! The breeze must feel wonderful.",
                                "Wanna man the helm? Yeah, right. Just kidding.",
                                "So, you're with Lady Yuna? That means you're a guardian.",
                                "Maybe I'll go have chat [sic] with Lady Yuna, too.",
                                "There was talk about warrior monks coming on board to guard the ship.",
                                "If Sin can't sink this ship, nothing can! We're guaranteed a safe voyage.",
                                "There's been turmoil on shore, but it's got nothing to do with us out here."
                        ],
                        "Helmsman (S. S. Winno)": [
                                "No offense, but I'm a diehard Luca Goers fan. Good luck, pal. You're gonna need it.",
                                "Maybe you're better off asking the Goers to coach you.",
                                "You're from Zanarkand? Everyone on the ship's been talking about you.",
                                "You've got the biggest mouth of any blitzer I've ever seen!",
                                "I can't believe the Aurochs won!",
                                "The Aurochs just got lucky.",
                                "Like I said before, you're no match for the Goers!",
                                "I've heard the Al Bhed attacked Bevelle with a flying ship."
                        ]
                },
                "Boy in dark red": {                },
                "Captain": {
                        "Captain of the S.S. Liki": [
                                "We'll arrive in Kilika before nightfall. Go on, take a nap or something.",
                                "The S.S. Liki is funded by Yevon.",
                                "Ocean weather can be fickle, but I doubt we'll see any storms today.",
                                "The cargo that the Crusaders loaded on board worries me.",
                                "It's a miracle this ship can still sail",
                                "Let's hope that the great sea will ease the pain of a battered sailor."
                        ],
                        "Captain of the S.S. Winno": [
                                "We're doing double duty on the watch to avoid ending up like the S.S. Liki.",
                                "This ship is just a ferry. We're doomed if we run into Sin.",
                                "We have two summoners and the Goers onboard.",
                                "What, the Besaid Aurochs? They're more like cargo.",
                                "We used to ferry a lot of Crusaders before Operation Mi'ihen",
                                "Let us pray that the souls of the fallen reach the Farplane."
                        ]
                },
                "Female Crusader in green and gold": {


                },
                "Man in brown coat": {
                        "Chocobo trainer": [
                                "Wow! That's a new personal best! Congratulations!",
                                "Don't give up. Someday you'll hold the record!",
                                "I may have won, but that was your best run yet.",
                                "Unbelievable! That was a perfect run!",
                                " I guess I'm the challenger. Enjoy it while you can!",
                                "Come challenge me again sometime. I'll keep a record"
                        ],


                        "Man on guard in brown coat": [
                                "Hey, hey! You can't go down there!",
                                "Hey, I saw it! I saw the race!",
                                "It's been ages since I could get my mind off my job!"
                        ],
                        "Man in brown and green": [
                                "The Guado have apparently lost their willpower and are in low spirits."
                        ]
                },






                                "The Macalania temple is losing its faith. I do not wish to live there anymore."
                        ]
                },
                "Woman in white": {
                        ["PHEW, that's everyone in Spira we've met so far."],
                        "Pious woman": [
                                "It's the machina's fault that so many of our Crusaders died.",
                                "I can't believe Lady Yuna would ever turn her back to the teachings! Never!",
                                "How unfortunate that Lady Yuna's engagement to Maester Seymour was put off.",
                                "I pray that the next Calm will last a long time."
                        ]
                },
                
                        "Tidus": [
                                "Listen to my story. This may be our last chance.",
                                "I thought about a lot of things",
                                "I had made it out of the frying pan",
                                "So I told her everything there was to tell about Zanarkand",
                                "My Zanarkand, some kind of holy place?",
                                "Yevon? Sin? Luca? I thought Sin just",
                                "(fistpump) Finally, things were starting to look up.",
                                "I felt like I could trust this Wakka, so I just had to ask.",
                                "It was just as Rikku said.",
                                "I appreciated the fact that Wakka was trying to cheer me up.",
                                "I thought then that blitzball and Sin were the only two things that Spira",
                                "I didn't know it in the first place",
                                "Of course I'd never prayed before in my life.",
                                "Any blitzball player would know that prayer.",
                                "It was then, standing in that place, I began to realize",
                                "It was funny hearing myself make the same excuse over and over.",
                                "So what he meant ... was that we should respect some kinda great men",
                                "Maybe this wasn't such a good idea after all.",
                                "Man, was I surprised. And here I was thinking summoners were all old geezers.",
                                "I had never seen anything like it in my life.",
                                "Miracles and oddities were starting to become daily routine on this trip.",
                                "When Sin attacked Zanarkand that day, I woke up in Spira.",
                                "I was just fooling myself. Maybe it was that day",
                                "I wished there would never be a next time.",
                                "That moment when Wakka told me I had talent in battle",
                                "Wakka, Lulu, and Wakka's brother Chappu.",
                                "Even ten years after he left",
                                "A guardian is someone a summoner can rely on.",
                                "What's she smiling about?",
                                "I thought I had put my feelings for Zanarkand behind me.",
                                "So, Yuna, wanna come over to my place?",
                                "I didn't think my old man would come to Luca.",
                                "It didn't even occur to me to think that the Auron Yuna was talking about",
                                "To be honest, I did kind of feel left out, but",
                                "Even for a little while ... people can sleep in their beds",
                                "That sunset was different from the one I saw in Kilika.",
                                "I knew it couldn't be my Zanarkand.",
                                "From the first time I laid eyes on him",
                                "It would be a long time ... before I ever really understood",
                                "I remembered Auron telling me. Sin is my old man. Sin is Jecht.",
                                "I have no idea what I was thinking when I ran after Sin that day.",
                                "I thought I sensed my old man there.",
                                "How many died today?",
                                "People die, and Yuna dances.",
                                "Sin had come and gone, but I remained here.",
                                "Yeah, maybe when I was a kid. Maybe a little now. Just a little.",
                                "I hadn't really laughed like that in a long time.",
                                "Where there's a will, there's a way.",
                                "It was strange. Even though Wakka had always hated the Al Bhed ...",
                                "He never realized Rikku was one of them.",
                                "I had to stop myself from shouting What's there to think about?",
                                "I wondered why none of the others ever asked Yuna.",
                                "The Farplane was cool, but I couldn't stop thinking",
                                "Trying not to think about my old man made me think about him",
                                "He isn't here because he's not dead.",
                                "What if my old man really is Sin? ",
                                "Whenever my old man was around, my mother wouldn't even look at me.",
                                "The old lady next door told me",
                                "Somehow, my bad feelings always come true.",
                                "It's funny how calm I was. Maybe it was because",
                                "I guess I understood. My old man",
                                "Maybe I had to start accepting my own fate.",
                                "\"Praise be to Yevon.\" That's what I would have said",
                                "It was then I knew ... that Sin really was my old man.",
                                "I told Yuna I would find a way.",
                                "Sometimes Yuna would just stare off into the distance.",
                                "I wanted to see Yuna's statue, too.",
                                "A city dead for a thousand years.",
                                "My thoughts, they kept floating up",
                                "Listen to my story. This may be our last chance."
                        ],
Bhed cipher",
                                "[There's a clue on the rock spire next to Svanda ... ] With the vale",
                                "Inside the ruined tower There is a valley in a vast plain"
                        ]
                },
                "Bird-counting person on top deck": {
        
                                "Ten fiends still seek eternal repose. (After killing ten) The fiends, now freed, release the seal of Yevon!"
                        ]
                },


                },
                "Gatta Luzzu": {
                        "Luzzu": ["Best to let him sleep."]
                },
                "Luzzu": {
                        "Gatta": ["Be on guard. There're fiends on the road today!"]
                },
        
                },
                "Warrior monk patrolling": {
                        "Warrior monk patrolling (temple forecourt)": [
                                "I have quit the Crusaders and have joined the warrior monks to protect the temple!",
                                "The warrior monk I respect most is Sir Auron"
                        ]
                },
                "Old man near inn": {
                        "Old Man (Grandfather)": ["My grandchildren are on the Farplane."],
                        "Kilika Old Man": ["I just want to live in Kilika in peace."]
                },
                "Man in green and white": {
                        "Besaid Handyman": [
                                "Sir Luzzu and Gatta aren't back yet.",
                                "I'm no fiend-fighter, so I fix things and help the Crusaders that way."
                        ],
                        "Spoony": [
                                "Is it true that the temple is in chaos? I don't believe that one bit!",
                                "Is it true that Maester Seymour isn't a normal Guado?",
                                "I asked a warrior monk out to the cafe, but she called me a spoony bard! Unbelievable!"
                        ]
                },
                "Hypello": {
                        "Hypello adult": [
                                "Thish ishn't the shtadium ... ? I shink I'm losht."
                        ]
                },
                "Luca guard on patrol": {
                        "Roving guard in gray (FoS)": [
                                "We were supposed to get some time off after the tournament"
                        ],
                        "Roving guard in blue (FoS)": [
                                "Please report any suspicious activity."
                        ]
                },
                "Warrior monk on bench where Crusader used to sit": {
                        "Warrior monk on bench (where Crusader sat)": [
                                "We are protecting Luca under Maester Kinoc's orders."
                        ],
                        "Female warrior monk on bench (where Crusader sat)": [
                                "So many Crusaders have died and yet people are watching blitzball?"
                        ]
                },
                "Guy in khaki": {
Bhed.]"
                        ]
                },
                "Guard": {
                        "Guard (Dock 2)": [
                                "Patrolling a large structure such as this would be next to impossible.",
                                "Dock number 3 lies straight ahead."
                        ],
                        "Guard (Dock 3)": [
                                "A watchman is posted at every dock for your safety.",
                                "To my left is dock number 2 and to my right is dock number 4."
                        ],
                        "Guard (Dock 4)": [
                                "Dock number 3 lies straight ahead.",
                                "The sphere monitor makes our job a lot easier."
                        ],
                        "Guard (Dock 5)": [
                                "This is Dock number 5. Dock number 4 lies straight ahead.",
                                "If you're looking for the entrance, please go back the other way.",
                                "I turned away for a second, and look what happened!",
                                "I'll have these crates moved in no time, sir!"
                        ]
                },
                "Little boy": {
                        "Vilucha's son": [
                                "Yeah, but ...",
                                "Yeah!",
                                "Let's go help the summoner! I promise I'll be a good boy!"
                        ],
                        "Blitzball Kid": ["I'm gonna be a blitzball when I grow up!"],
                        "Little boy (Goers fan)": [
                                "I'm gonna practice blitz real hard and be just like Bickson!",
                                "Guess what, guess what? I shook Bickson's hand!",
                                "Take it easy, sis! You're too obsessed with ships.",
                                "Sis once got caught trying to sneak onto that ferry."
                        ]
                },
                "Sailor with blue cap on gangway": {
                        "Sailor w/blue cap": [
                                "I kinda got to liking this town. Maybe I'll be giving up seafaring.",
                                "Someone saw an Al Bhed ship near the island.",
                                "One of my friends is on your ship. I'll pray for both of you.",
                                "No matter what happens in the temples, it's life as usual here.",
                                "I heard the Guado blew up the Al Bhed's home!",
                                "That flying ship was spectacular!"
                        ],
                        "Sailor with blue cap (S. S. Winno)": [
                                "I'm sorry, sir, but the ferry will remain at anchor for a while."
                        ]
                },
                "Sailor in blue cap": {
                        "Sailor w/blue cap": [
                                "Seems kind of odd to pray for the temple's sake, ya?"
                        ],
                        "Sailor with blue cap (S. S. Winno)": [
                                "This ferry will take you to",
                                ". Would you like to board?",
                                "Would you like to board?",
                                "We can leave any time you're ready.",
                                "Give me a holler when you're ready."
                        ]
                },
                "Lucan guard": {
                        "Cafe Guard in Gray": [
                                "The tournament's finally over. Gimme some peace, will you?",
                                "It's terrible. The fiends attacked while His Holiness was here."
                        ],
                        "Luca guard in brown": ["If anything had happened to Maester Mika"]
                },
                "Female warrior monk on stadium end of causeway": {
                        "Female warrior monk (Sphere Theatre)": [
                                "I admire that young Crusader's dedication."
                        ]
                },
                "Little girl in nun's habit": {
                        "Playful Little Nun": [
                                "What happened to the Crusaders? They all look so sad."
                        ],
                        "Little nun (Sphere Theatre)": [
                                "I came to buy a sphere, but I don't have enough money.",
                                "I asked a monk to buy me a sphere"
                        ],
                        "Little nun (Dock 4)": [
                                "I'm still in training, so I'm watching the game on the sphere."
                        ]
                },
                "Roving Luca guard in blue": {
                        "Roving guard in blue (FoS)": [
                                "Please report any suspicious activity."
                        ]
                },
                "Roving guard in gray": {
                        "Stadium Guard in Gray": ["What are you doing out here?"],
                        "Roving guard in gray (FoS)": [
                                "Aren't you a blitzer? Better check the rules while you still can."
                        ]
                },
                "Roving Luca guard": {
                        "Stadium Guard in Gray": [
                                "Since games are played every day, the guards are always on duty."
                        ]
                },
                "Engineer": {
                        "Bearded engineer": ["The ship is fine, even inside Sin, I think."]
                },
                "Gas mask guy": {
                        "Man in gas mask": [
                                "If you are prepared, we can attack Sin at any time!",
                                "The gravity, it bends! And with Sin at the center!",
                                "You attack from the front? It is a crazy, but delightful plan!"
                        ],
                        "Gas mask guy (Bikanel)": [
                                "But then, we still have blitz, you see?"
                        ]
                },
                "Crusader in need of pants": {
                        "Bare-legged Crusader (Luca)": [
                                "I quit the Crusaders after the operation, but I'm back in again.",
                                "I'm rooting for the Al Bhed Psyches this year."
                        ]
                },
                "Barechested man in shorts": {
                        "Guy in red shorts": ["The Aurochs are a completely new team!"]
                },
                "Warrior monk in gold": {
                        "Warrior monk (FoS)": [
                                "Please report any suspicious activity to me immediately!"
                        ],
                        "Warrior monk (Dock 4)": [
                                "Look at the size of those Ronso! The fact that I'm supposed to be guarding them is pretty funny, don't you think?"
                        ]
                },
                "Crusader in purple and green": {
                        "Short Crusader in purple and green": [
                                "We incurred heavy casualties in last year's Djose coast",
                                "I found this lying on the battlefield.",
                                "All I can offer now are my prayers."
                        ],
                        "Crusader in purple and green (Mi'ihen)": [
                                "Here's a little something to cheer you up before the big fight.",
                                "I'm gonna vanquish Sin and return home a hero.",
                                "Us Crusaders ... We're gonna make history with this operation.",
                                "No doubt we're gonna win."
                        ]
                },
                "Man in blue vest": {
                        "Aurochs fan": [
                                "Hey, did you see the lady summoner?",
                                "The Aurochs really improved this year, but their success was overshadowed by the fiend incident.",
                                "Only a few have returned alive.",
                                "Why use machina, when we have summoners?",
                                "The only thing the people can really do is to pray for the Calm.",
                                "Hurray! With the Crusaders back I feel like we could take on two Sins!"
                        ],
                        "Man in blue vest (Mi'ihen South)": [
                                "We all had a swell time singing when the ship flew over us."
                        ],
                        "Man in blue vest (Mi'ihen Central)": [
                                "Everyone looks calm, but they are still afraid of Sin."
                        ]
                },
                "Bearded Al Bhed": {
                        "Bearded guy": ["Yes! It is so!"]
                },
                "Woman in blue": {
                        "Isken's friend": [
                                "The Kilika Beasts didn't win, but that's okay.",
                                "Sin's been around for a thousand years and will probably be around for a thousand more."
                        ],
                        "Midriff-baring lady in blue in cafe": [
                                "Seymour's aeon was really something, wasn't it?",
                                "I'd like to believe that a maester of such power could keep Spira peaceful.",
                                "There are warrior monks everywhere you look.",
                                "The high summoner's daughter would never turn traitor."
                        ],
                        "Woman in blue (Luca)": [
                                "Don't you think it's disrespectful of the Al Bhed to play in the Yevon Cup?",
                                "Up until last year, it was the Crusaders who were in charge of security.",
                                "Those warrior monks were useless. They didn't do a thing."
                        ],
                        "Woman in blue near Mushroom Rock Gate": [
                                "The warrior monks and the Guado guarding this area have left."
                        ]
                },
                "Little Crusader": {
                        "Little Crusader (Sphere Theatre)": [
                                "Travellers check this monitor for fiend information before setting out on their journey.",
                                "You should check the sphere monitor before you set out.",
                                "A fiend might be attracted to the music!"
                        ],
                        "Little Crusader (Dock 2)": ["Nothing out of the ordinary, sir!"]
                },
                "Man in blue and white": {
                        "Man in white and blue (Luca)": [
                                "Looks like that last machina attack sent Sin back to the sea for now."
                        ],
                        "Man in white and blue (Mi'ihen)": [
                                "Hey there, guardians. Here. Use this to defend our summoner well.",
                                "I hear some big operation's about to start.",
                                "I don't know what the Crusaders are up to,",
                                "The Crusaders can't beat Sin."
                        ]
                },
                "Old woman": {
                        "Besaid Old Woman": [
                                "Me favorite's Lord Ohalland, ya? Spitting image of me old hubby.",
                                "Stay away from the summoner!",
                                "What do you want, heathen?",
                                "I've nothing to say to a breaker of the precepts!",
                                "Do not disturb our prayers, heathen!",
                                "What? You? A guardian? The toxin's still got you, eh?",
                                "When the Calm comes, we'll be putting up a statue of a new high summoner."
                        ],
                        "Old Woman (Grandmother)": [
                                "My granddaughter wants to be a sailor when she grows up. What a dreadful thought!",
                                "I tell her how dangerous it is out on the ocean, but she never listens."
                        ],
                        "Old woman merchant": [
                                "Feel free to buy loads of merchandise, but I ain't giving you a discount."
                        ],
                        "Old woman (Mi'ihen)": [
                                "My grandpa and I ... We used to take a stroll through here almost every day."
                        ]
                },
                "Woman in green skirt": {
                        "Refugee": [
                                "A summoner named Lord Isaaru came to the village, but he left so soon.",
                                "The Crusaders' operation failed as expected, because they used machina!",
                                "Operation Mi'ihen was a crushing loss for the Crusaders",
                                "Maybe I should learn Besaid weaving ... make a place for myself here.",
                                "I doubt some old song is going to help anyone beat Sin."
                        ],
                        "Woman in green skirt by TV studio": [
                                "There must be a hundred people in red out there.",
                                "Seymour's aeon may be able to destroy Sin.",
                                "With only the Crusaders and the Al Bhed helping",
                                "I don't know much about religion, but there's something weird about the temple."
                        ],
                        "Calli's Mother": ["My Lady Summoner!"]
                },
                "Man in green and brown at south end of Mi'ihen Highroad": {
                        "Worried man in green and brown": [
                                "Their owner's a Crusader and he hasn't returned yet ..."
                        ]
                },
                "Man in green and brown": {
                        "Guy in green and brown": ["I feel bad for the Crusaders."],
                        "Worried man in green and brown": ["They haven't eaten at all."]
                },
                "Man in gold tunic": {
                        "Goers Fan": [
                                "The Goers didn't win, but a true fan",
                                "I just want to wish the Goers luck"
                        ]
                },
                "Man in yellow and blue": {
                        "Ferry Greeter": [
                                "I hear Sin has gone far away.",
                                "Did you hear? When you see the flying ship",
                                "So, uh ... I sang the Hymn of the Fayth"
                        ],
                        "Man in yellow and blue (Mi'ihen)": [
                                "Please give this to the lady summoner as a token of my gratitude.",
                                "The Crusaders are really active.",
                                "I heard that Crusaders are marching in from all over Spira.",
                                "Mum's the word. I hear the temples of Yevon are in on this, too."
                        ]
                },
                "Al Bhed child (blue pants)": {
                        "Al Bhed child kneeling": ["My dad is riding on an airship."]
                },
                "Woman in tan and orange": {
                        "Mother in tan and orange": [
                                "Have you seen a little boy? My son and I got separated in the crowd."
                        ],
                        "Woman in tan and orange (Mi'ihen)": [
                                "You look awful depressed, and it's such a beautiful day.",
                                "That flying ship will bring about the Calm."
                        ],
                        "Wife in tan and orange": [
                                "Our son won't stay away from that Al Bhed. "
                        ]
                },
                "Boy in red": {
                        "Older boy": [
                                "The priest told me the story of Lady Yunalesca and Lord Zaon."
                        ]
                },
                "Mother": {
                        "Mother on bench": [
                                "I never believed that the fiends would attack this city. This is horrible."
                        ],
                        "Calli's Mother": [
                                "We're looking forward to another Calm, My Lady Summoner.",
                                "And good luck to your guardians as well."
                        ],
                        "Seymour's mother": [
                                "There is no other way. Use me and defeat Sin. Only then will the people accept you.",
                                "I don't ... have much time left."
                        ],
                        "Grieving Mother": [
                                "Our son was killed in Operation Mi'ihen.",
                                "Never did I imagine our son would depart before our time."
                        ]
                },
                "Guado girl in purple": {
                        "Guado teenaged girl": [
                                "I don't want to go back to Guadosalam because it reminds me of my brother."
                        ],
                        "Redheaded girl in purple in Glories' house": [
                                "You find it difficult telling us Guado apart, don't you?",
                                "Actually, we Guado tend to have trouble telling one human from another, too."
                        ]
                },
                "Redheaded girl in purple": {
                        "Redheaded girl in purple in Glories' house": [
                                "I prayed and prayed on the Farplane"
                        ],
                        "Guado woman in purple": [
                                "Soon Sin will come for us all. Human, Guado, it makes no difference."
                        ]
                },
                "boy with the green headband": {
                        "Woman w/red headband": [
                                "-Hey! Stop that! Just watch what your big sis is doing and learn!"
                        ],
                        "Girl in red shorts": ["-Yay!"]
                },
                "Sailor": {
                        "Sailor w/blue cap": [
                                "Is it true that Sin showed up near here?",
                                "Seafaring is hard work. Gotta kick back sometimes.",
                                "I sure hope we don't run into Sin on our next voyage.",
                                "I saw the apprentice summoner and two guardians enter the temple yesterday.",
                                "I do hope they come back safely.",
                                "If you muck around here, the ship will leave without you!",
                                "I'm gonna kick back in town till the next ship gets here.",
                                "I really, really hope we don't run into Sin on this voyage."
                        ],
                        "Sailor with binoculars": [
                                "Huh? You want to use the binoculars?",
                                "No way. Remember what you did last time?",
                                "I see."
                        ]
                },
                "Sailor in blue": {
                        "Sailor in blue (Dock 1)": [
                                "The ferries that run to Kilika and Besaid have resumed operation."
                        ],
                        "Sailor in blue (S. S. Winno)": [
                                "The Aurochs are the team to watch this year.",
                                "Ha! No way. I only meant it'll be fun to watch.",
                                "You're a blitzer from Zanarkand, right?",
                                "That guy poking around back there is taking sphere shots of Lady Yuna.",
                                "The Aurochs are getting too hyped up before the match.",
                                "I'm glad I got here safely."
                        ],
                        "2nd harpooner": [
                                "Ever since Sin got to him, my partner has turned into a gutless wonder.",
                                "Sin's toxin probably got to him.",
                                "Ever since Sin attacked us, my shipmate has been terrified of the sea."
                        ]
                },
                "Sailor in white pants slumped nearby": {
                                        "Crusader in purple": {
                        "Crusader in purple and white": [
                                "Those Ronso players are massive!"
                        ],
                        "Crusader in purple (fork)": [
                                "A summoner's entourage! Please accept this.",
                                "After the operation, my compadres and I are heading straight to Luca.",
                                "Do you think Yevon will take us back in if we succeed?"
                        ],
                        "Crusader in yellow and purple (fork)": [
                                "Give this to the lady summoner, and grant us your help when the time comes."
                        ],
                        "Crusader in green (fork)": [
                                "Be sure to make thorough preparations.",
                                "We've concentrated our forces along the coast to prevent Sin from reaching land.",
                                "My friend is stationed there."
                        ],
                        "Crusader in yellow and green (fork)": [
                                "We've secured the command center perimeter.",
                                "This is a mechanical lift built by the Al Bhed.",
                                "Relying on machines goes against the teachings"
                        ],
                        "Crusader in purple (Mushroom Rock)": [
                                "Fiends are on the rampage!"
                        ],
                        "Uncertain Crusader in purple": [
                                "I thought I'd quit the Crusaders for good, but singing the Hymn changed my mind."
                        ],
                        "Peaceful Crusader in purple": [
                                "Lord Mi'ihen once passed along this road.With the Crusaders in disarray"
                        ],
                        "Crusader in purple (Djose Bridge)": [
                                "You can't defeat Sin with machina.",
                                "Here, take this. I don't need it anymore.",
                                "We should live according to the teachings."
                        ]
                },
                "Monk in righthand chamber doing flying kick": {
                        "Monk in orange": [
                                "I'm offering prayers for all the soldiers who lost their lives in that futile operation.",
                                "So many youths have died, all because of that Al Bhed machina."
                        ],
                        "Monk (Djose Temple)": [
                                "We plan to station warrior monks in various locales to prepare for a possible raid by fiends"
                        ]
                },
                "Slumped Crusader": {
                        "Crusader slumped against bar": [
                                "Once Sin is destroyed, it's celebration time!"
                        ]
                },
                "Crusader in green": {
                        "Adult Crusader (back by the data console)": [
                                "I've configured this monitor to display information on fiends roaming around the Luca area.",
                                "Once you leave Luca, you'll have to travel the long and winding Mi'ihen Highroad."
                        ],
                        "Crusader in green by checkpoint": [
                                "The Crusaders supplied us with some goods. Here you go.",
                                "Maester Seymour came to witness our deeds here today.",
                                "I must relay Lord Seymour's message to the men."
                        ],
                        "Crusader in green (Mi'ihen)": [
                                "Providing is preventing. Need I say more? This'll help.",
                                "it's not going to be easy.",
                                "Of course when the time comes, we'll march in full force to victory.",
                                "They say luck decides the battle, but we can't afford to lose."
                        ],
                        "Crusader in green and gold (The Scar)": [
                                "This land, where Lady Yocun trained, is sacred to the Crusaders."
                        ],
                        "Crusader in green (Djose Highroad)": [
                                "My comrades are dead, all because we ignored the teachings.",
                                "This'll hardly make amends, but ... I want the lady summoner to have this.",
                                "I guess it's time to seek the monks' help and embrace the teachings once again."
                        ],
                        "Crusader in green guarding Djose Temple": [
                                "The Crusaders have fallen apart, so I'm going to help out with guard duty",
                                "Maybe I should quit the Crusaders and become a warrior monk.",
                                "This temple's security is pretty tight.",
                                "I hear Lady Yuna's getting married."
                        ],
                        "Green Crusader with wound": [
                                "So Lady Yuna's getting married, huh? That's great news.",
                                "By the time we get home, they'll be celebrating their marriage."
                        ]
                },
                "Man in green and white outside pavillion": {
                
                },
                "Old Man": {
                        "Elderly Guado Man": [
                                "Our youth are all dead. Our future seemeth likewise dead."
                        ],
                        "Old man on loading platform": [
                                "I thought that flying airship was Yevon's secret weapon"
                        ]
                },


                "Crusader in yellow and green": {
                        "Shopping Crusader in yellow and green": [
                                "I'm short on various stuff",
                                "Well, I guess I should just be thankful.",
                                "Time to shop!"
                        ],
                        "Female Crusader accompanying friend": [
                                "The Guado can't stop talking about the marriage.",
                                "I want to quit the Crusaders and settle down in the country."
                        ],


                        ]
                },
                "Woman in purple": {
                        "Weaver": [
                                "A summoner arrived here just recently.",
                                "I believe his name was Lord Isaaru ... yes, that's it.",
                                "I've heard that the Crusaders who fought Sin were defeated!",
                                "When those children calling themselves Crusaders come back, they're in for a scolding.",
                                "I'm glad the ferry's on its way, but Sin will be back, he will.",
                                "I heard the sailors' gossip about Lady Yuna getting married?",
                                "I should think Lady Yuna would be the last to marry and quit her pilgrimage!",
                                "The people of Besaide are friends to Lady Yuna.",
                                "All these warrior monks were here looking for Lady Yuna.",
                                "If Lady Yuna defeats Sin I'm sure those nasty rumors will go away.",
                                "That flying ship–now that's what I call a blessing of Yevon.",
                                "I wonder who was riding on that ship in the sky?",
                                "Everyone in the village is all excited about that flying ship."
                        ],
                        "Woman in purple by loading platform": [
                                "Riding the shoopuf is free because the temple pays for it.",
                                "The temple provides for the people. We are truly blessed."
                        ]
                },
                "Crusader in red, white, blue": {
                        "Crusader in RWB (Kilika)": [
                                "Even if Sin is destroyed, there will always be fiends around."
                        ],
                        "Crusader in RWB (Mi'ihen)": [
                                "A fellow Crusader and I promised to meet here after the operation and have some drinks.",
                                "That guy always keeps his promises. I'm not leaving here until he comes.",
                                "I'll stay on to guard the Highroad, even without my fellow Crusaders.",
                                "Nothing you say will sway us.",
                                "I am well aware of the risks of this mission."
                        ],
                        "Crusader captain": [
                                "The Crusaders have been ordered to regroup at Djose Temple.",
                                "It's my fault. My men died in vain because of me."
                        ],
                        "Crusader in red, white and blue lying beside road": [
                                "Unbelievable! A flying ship that sings"
                        ],
                        "Crusader in RWB (Moonflow)": [
                                "Please rest assured, the shoopuf is operating as usual.",
                                "The fight against Sin continues."
                        ]
                },
                "Man in white and blue": {
                        "Man in white and blue (Luca)": [
                                "The Goers are gonna win. Everyone else is goin' down!",
                                "Ending the tournament with the fiend attack left a bad taste in my mouth.",
                                "The Crusaders are kicking up a real ruckus down the Highroad.",
                                "Well, if they really can wipe out Sin, I guess",
                                "I hear Lady Yuna's wedding was called off."
                        ],
                        "Man in white and blue (Mi'ihen)": [
                                "The collapse of the Crusaders, the conflict in Bevelle"
                        ],
                        "Husband in white and blue by loading platform": [
                                "My wife and I ran away from Bevelle."
                        ]
                },
                "Hooded guado woman near pavillion": {
                        "Eavesdropping on crowd": [
                                "Lord Braska must be bursting with pride up on the Farplane at having such a fine daughter!"
                        ]
                },
                "Woman in orange tunic": {
                        "Woman in orange tunic (Luca)": [
                                "Hmmm ... A guy in a red coat, huh?",
                                "This guy in a red robe took down a fiend in one blow!",
                                "With all these warrior monks, it feels more like they're occupying Luca than defending it."
                        ],
                        "Woman in gold and tan by loading platform": [
                                "I thought I was lucky not to run into any wily merchants",
                                "His goods are cheaper than the other merchants'"
                        ]
                },
                "Little nun": {
                        "Tiny nun by door of temple": [
                                "I knew all along you weren't traitors."
                        ],
                        "Studious Little Nun": [
                                "Guess what? I really like studying the scriptures!",
                                "My mommy and daddy are at a place called the far plain.",
                                "We all sang together, so why isn't Sin dead yet?"
                        ],
                        "Little nun (Sphere Theatre)": [
                                "The monks have been looking stern lately."
                        ],
                        "Little Nun": [
                                "Maester Seymour always smells so nice! Isn't he grand?"
                        ]
                },
                "Nun": {
                        "Nun in Luca": [
                                "You think I stand out in this temple attire?",
                                "The Crusaders are devising a sacrilegious operation."
                        ],
                        "Nun (Dock 4)": [
                                "Everybody loves blitz! Even the warrior monks love it!"
                        ],
                        "Nun in lefthand chamber": [
                                "Despite hearing rumors about your rebellion, I always believed you were innocent.",
                                "Yevon's blessing has saved many Crusaders from Sin's onslaught."
                        ],
                        "Nun in green": ["Lord Jyscal! A sphere, in Lady Yuna's belongings"]
                },
                "Old Woman": {
                        "Besaid Old Woman": [
                                "What trick have you pulled on the good Lady Yuna?"
                        ],
                        "Elderly Guado Woman": [
                                "Lord Seymour took many lives. It seems he is now revenged on both Guado and human."
                        ],
                        "Macalania Old Woman": [
                                "Those who once criticized the Al Bhed are now blaming the Guado."
                        ]
                },
                "Al Bhed woman in leggings": {
                        "Al Bhed woman in leggins (Mi'ihen)": ["The children are happy."],
                        "Al Bhed woman with leggings": [
                                "They say that Sin has fallen on Bevelle. All the Yevon folk are in a panic",
                                "!"
                        ]
                },
                "Warrior monk": {
                        "Warrior monk patrolling (temple forecourt)": [
                                "No, no, I am not a warrior monk! I have rejoined the Crusaders."
                        ],
                        "Warrior monk at bar": [
                                "The Crusaders and warrior monks share a common desire to protect the people.",
                                "The temple is a wreck. I really want to quit the warrior monks."
                        ],
                        "Warrior monk (Dock 1)": [
                                "Luca is such a strange place. The Al Bhed are walking around freely."
                        ],
                        "Warrior monk (Dock 5)": ["Cargo is scattered all over the place!"],
                        "Former Warrior Monk": [
                                "Don't get me wrong. I used to be a warrior monk"
                        ],
                        "Warrior monk (south wharf)": [
                                "There have been reports of Al Bhed sightings in this area.",
                                "The Al Bhed have green eyes with a swirl pattern.",
                                "The Al Bhed are roaming this area, targeting summoners.",
                                "The Al Bhed have green eyes with a swirl pattern."
                        ],
                        "Warrior monk (north wharf)": [
                                "Seems you destroyed the Al Bhed's machina.",
                                "The Al Bhed hide their green eyes with goggles."
                        ],
                        "Warrior monk (orange) on lift to Command Center": [
                                "You're out of luck. "
                        ],
                        "Warrior monk (Bevelle Crossroads)": [
                                "The road to Bevelle is closed."
                        ],
                        "Warrior monk (Thunder Plains)": ["You heathen!"]
                },
                "Warrior Monk": {
                        "Warrior monk (Highbridge)": [
                                "Infidel!",
                                "You'll regret showing your face here!",
                                "Prepare to charge!",
                                "Captain?",
                                "Then ... what are we to do?"
                        ],
                        "Warrior monk patrolling highroad": [
                                "There are some suspicious Al Bhed prowling around the Highroad.",
                                "Please notify me if you run into any Al Bhed."
                        ]
                },
                "Handyman": {
                        "Besaid Handyman": [
                                "Don't bother people when they're praying! It's against the teachings!",
                                "He looks pretty weak. Maybe he just can't take it.",
                                "Oh! There are so many things I want to tell her.",
                                "Hey, you! The sea's crawling with fiends, so give this to Yuna, okay?"
                        ],
                        "Kilika Handyman": [
                                "I hear the Crusaders are going to fight Sin without the aid of a summoner.",
                                "Seeing blitzball players here is a sure sign that the tournament is approaching."
                        ]
                },
                "Crusader in gold and green": {
                        "Crusader in green on end of dock": [
                                "Sin is still out there. This is a job for the Crusaders!"
                        ],
                        "Recovered Crusader in gold and green": [
                                "I took a bad hit fighting Sin. I couldn't walk for a while."
                        ],
                        "Crusader in green guarding Djose Temple": [
                                "We're facing tough times.",
                                "The warrior monks left for Bevelle, so it's our job to protect this temple.",
                                "Take care! Damn, I wish I could go with you.",
                                "Good luck! Destroy Sin for us all, all right?",
                                "Come back anytime!"
                        ]
                },
                "Monk": {
                        "Kilika Priest": [
                                "The Kilika Beasts may have lost the tournament",
                                "The Besaid Aurochs have done well this year."
                        ],
                        "Monk guarding Kilika Temple Steps": [
                                "You, there! Your kind is not welcome in this holy place!"
                        ],
                        "Monk in Luca": [
                                "The people are indulging in merrymaking, but we must keep in mind that",
                                "Glory be to Maester Seymour's aeon",
                                "I shall remain in Luca for a while and spread the word of Yevon among the citizens."
                        ],
                        "Monk (Mi'ihen)": ["I guess all children are innocent"],
                        "Monk (Djose Bridge)": [
                                "The Crusaders deeply regret their actions.",
                                "Should you need a place to recuperate, please return.",
                                "I believe the wounded soldiers will find solace in our prayers.",
                                "This is Djose Temple, located at the heart of the Djose Continent.",
                                "There is nothing I can do but pray."
                        ],
                        "Monk (Djose Temple)": [
                                "Oh, my ... We are out of funeral shrouds.",
                                "All I have to offer are my prayers.",
                                "My fellow monks have left the temple. They said nothing will change so long as we remain within these confines."
                        ],
                        "Monk at the door": [
                                "The Guado have left the temple, restoring peace to this holy place."
                        ]
                },
                "Female Crusader in red": {
                        "Female Crusader in Red (Kilika)": [
                                "I've givin' [sic] up on becoming a warrior monk",
                                "When we were training in the forest",
                                "The Crusaders of Kilika will disband soon"
                        ],
                        "Female Crusader in Red (Luca)": ["Luca is a free city."]
                },
                "Guado woman in hood": {
                        "Hooded woman in shop": [
                                "My husband has long served as a guardian to the leaders of the Guado.",
                                "We imagine Lord Seymour will rise to great glory in Spira."
                        ],
                        "Eavesdropping on crowd": [
                                "Lord Braska must be bursting with pride up on the Farplane at having such a fine daughter!"
                        ],
                        "Guado Woman in hood on upper level": [
                                "I suppose you think we look ... odd, don't you?",
                                "But if you ask me, you humans look absolutely disgusting.",
                                "Once, a human child simply looked at me and then burst into tears. That hurt.",
                                "Is Lord Seymour really going to marry? Aww ...",
                                "One of my friends patrols the roads.",
                                "We lost so many in the recent struggles"
                        ],
                        "Hooded guado woman near pavillion": [
                                "So that's Lady Yuna? Hmm ... No wonder.",
                                "I can see why the Al Bhed would go after someone like Lady Yuna."
                        ]
                },
                "Crusader in green and gold": {
                        "Crusader by empty cages": [
                                "There aren't many guards beyond here, so watch it."
                        ],
                        "Crusader in green and gold (The Scar)": [
                                "Our comrades have gathered from all over, to this place where Lady Yocun once trained."
                        ]
                },
                "Wakka": {
                        "Journeyman weaver": [
                                "Mainlanders love the fabrics we weave here in Spira.",
                                "I suppose you can't run a business on tradition alone, ya?"
                        ],
                        "Supervising Soldier": [
                                "Can't you see we're working!?",
                                "The other way! To the right!",
                                "The other way! To the left!"
                        ]
                },
                "Qu": {
                        "Quina": ["You got frog!", "Me?"],
                        "Quan": [
                                "... Hungry. Maybe is end of attempting to fish Mist from sky and eat it... Is no possible to prove theory of nourishment with no eating... Hmm? I catch something."
                        ]
                },
                "Moogle": {
                        "Kupo": ["Sorry 'bout that, kupo!"],
                        "Mene": [
                                "Kupooo!!! I'm Mene, master of this forest! This chocobo is my friend, kupo. His name is Choco."
                        ],
                        "Mogmi": [
                                "Darling! Can you hear me!? Darling!!! Please say something!"
                        ],
                        "Moguta": ["Kupooo!", "Kupooo! I love Kupo Nuts!"],
                        "Mois": [
                                "Hot! Hot! Hot! You bastards!!! Oh, I can move again. Thanks, kupo!"
                        ],
                        "Lowell": [
                                "(Ouch! Damn. I can't see a thing.) Thank you for coming to see 'Moogle Wannabe 2'...k-kupo.",
                                "Phew."
                        ],
                        "Mogrich": ["Kupo!"],
                        "Chimomo": [
                                "Kupo!",
                                "Um... How many people do I need to account for, kupo?",
                                "people! Kupo! {Pour Water / Think Again}",
                                "Water spilled over! Kupo? (You'll have to try again.)",
                                "Kupopo..."
                        ],
                        "Momatose": [
                                "I caught one! Kupo! It's heavy... Kupo!",
                                "Kupo!",
                                "This person keeps telling me to catch more fish... Kupo."
                        ],
                        "Mosco": [
                                "ATE, kupo! Active Time Event is a system that lets you see other events that are happening at the same time elsewhere, kupo!"
                        ]
                },
                "Monty": {
                        "Mogster": [
                                "Wait! Kupo! I'm impressed, kupo! First time I've seen anyone escape from Evil Forest. You all must be strong, kupo! But don't get cocky, kupo. Lots of stronger monsters ahead. Before you go out to the world, Mogster will teach you a few things.",
                                "I have a gift for you, kupo. Take this flute. With this flute, you can call us anywhere in the world, kupo. Press (()) to play it. Happy trails! Kupo!",
                                "Kupopo!",
                                "Kupoo!",
                                "Your friends already left, kupo."
                        ]
                },
                "Creature": {
                        "Cid": [
                                "<Gwok-gwok.> <Gwok-gwok!> Greetings!",
                                "(Gwok-gwok.) Gwok-gwok! Greetings!"
                        ],
                        "Black Waltz No. 2": [
                                "Princess Garnet, the queen is waiting for you at the castle!",
                                "Are you the one who defeated No. 1? I am Black Waltz No. 2! My power, magic, and speed make me far superior to No. 1! Resistance is futile! Come, Princess. The queen awaits!"
                        ]
                },
                "Pluto Knight": {
                        "Blank": [
                                "I-I'll go first, sir!",
                                "Captain, sir! I'm stuck, sir!",
                                "Hehehe. He bought it!",
                                "You needn't worry, Your Highness!",
                                "Hehehe! Just relax, Princess. We'll get you outta here!"
                        ]
                },
                "R2a": {
                        "Old Woman (Treno Equipment Shop)": [
                                "Are you sure? I can't guarantee your safety. Go stand in the middle of the cage."
                        ],
                        "Gilgamesh": [
                                "When several arrows face each other, multiple card battles may occur. You can choose where to begin the card battle when that happens. Where you choose to begin the battle affects how the rest of the battles play out. Let's see... You can also use combos."
                        ]
                },
                "Carpenter": {
                        "Carpenter (Treno Slums)": [
                                "Our houses need repair constantly. Not like the nobles' houses.",
                                "Sure, our houses are crappy, but at least they're still standing."
                        ]
                },
                "Voice": {
                        "Blank": ["Who's there!?"],
                        "Black Waltz No. 1": ["Why didn't you fall asleep?"],
                        "Zorn and Thorn": [
                                "You defeated No. 1, but No. 2 and No. 3 will reclaim the princess!"
                        ],
                        "Vivi": [
                                "<Sniff... Sniff...>",
                                "Ouch! Let me go! I'm not one of them!",
                                "Come on, Zidane, wake up!"
                        ],
                        "Zidane": ["OW! OOOWWWWWWCH!!!", "I'm coming with you!"],
                        "Wounded Burmecian Soldier": ["Regent..."],
                        "Clerk (Bishop's Mansion)": ["Somebody down there?"],
                        "Fratley": ["Minions of evil, you have gone too far!"],
                        "Puck": ["As a matter of fact, I'll tell ya!"],
                        "Cleyran High Priest": ["Eeeeek!"],
                        "Brahne": ["Beatrix!", "What is all this ruckus!?"],
                        "Lani": ["What a view."],
                        "Ramuh": [
                                "You're exactly right... It's not what the people say afterward... What's important is being true to oneself. She may not have realized it, but when she wished to learn how to use summon magic... The summon power returned to her. Summon magic can e used for good or evil. She is still young, but there is room for growth... So I chose her as my master. I'll be watching over her... I hope you two will also protect her."
                        ],
                        "Richard Watchman": ["Thief!"],
                        "Amarant": ["Hold it!", "Uh...", "Hey, Zidane!"],
                        "Marcus": ["Beatrix."],
                        "Ruby": ["You can still fly high, darlin'!"],
                        "Baku": [
                                "AAA-CHOO! AAA-CHOO!",
                                "AAH... ACHOOO!!!",
                                "What the heck are ya doin'!?",
                                "So this is where you were wastin' time!!!"
                        ],
                        "Kuja": [
                                "Peace is but a shadow of death Desperate to forget its painful past... Though we hope for promising years After shedding a thousand tears, Yesterday's sorrow constantly nears. An while the moon still shines blue, By dawn, it will turn to scarlet hue.",
                                "... Farewell, Zidane...",
                                "You still have time... Forget about me and go."
                        ],
                        "Quina": ["Finally, I found you!"],
                        "Stone Face": [
                                "%/\\()oo+x...",
                                "Visitors... Climb atop the stone...",
                                "Visitors, listen well... This is the record of our civilization"
                        ],
                        "Valia Pira": [
                                "Intruder alert. Defense system activated. Initializing automatic countermeasures. Transferring from observation to attack mode."
                        ],
                        "Cinna": ["I missed my ride!"],
                        "Soldier": [
                                "Mr. Zidane...",
                                "Hey, we got a live one here! Watch out! It might attack! Hey, this one's much smaller than the others.",
                                "Then why are you dressed like a black mage!?"
                        ],
                        "Taharka": ["M-Mirror... Return...to me..."],
                        "Earth Guard": ["I've been waiting for you..."],
                        "Garnet": ["Zidane!"],
                        "Garland": [
                                "So, we meet again.",
                                "The body becomes a vessel, which greets a new soul...",
                                "You could never build an eternal kingdom...",
                                "Do you think a defect like you could last forever...?",
                                "I built you to last only until the worthy Genome, Zidane, grew. It was too dangerous to let you last any longer than that.",
                                "There's a limit to your life... You'll be dead soon... Even as I die, you'll have died without ever leaving your mark on the world...",
                                "You were created to destroy. You are a mortal...",
                                "... Zidane, can you hear me?",
                                "... I am speaking only to you.",
                                "Memoria... A place of memories.",
                                "Yes, your memories brought forth this place... Here, you shall witness the truth. You have no choice. Now, go...",
                                "I feared Gaia's eidolons more than anything... However, I decided to deal with them before they became a major problem.",
                                "... Zidane, can you hear me? ... Zidane. What you just saw was from your memory, and not Garnet's.",
                                "You still don't understand... You will find out soon enough...",
                                "Once you accept everything, the answer will appear before you. A tremendous force was summoned to Gaia during the age of war... However, the Gaians were not ready to harness so great a power... They were terrified and broke the jewel into four pieces...and they prayed never to see it again.",
                                "That is a picture of Gaia being assimilated by Terra.",
                                "Life on Terra was coming to an end... We had no choice but to proceed with the fusion",
                                "This is the birth of Gaia.",
                                "Over 5,000 years ago...",
                                "See for yourself. Terra reached the peak of its prosperity at this time.",
                                "This is space.",
                                "Your journey is not yet over. Do not fear.",
                                "You have entered a new realm. There are no more worlds.",
                                ".........",
                                "... Do not limit memory to just one individual's experiences from birth.",
                                "... A presence that presides over all life and memories. The crystal...",
                                "You are on your own now. Zidane...take care of Kuja. ...and protect the crystal. Farewell...",
                                "Even if I were created to serve one purpose alone, I do not regret being born to this world."
                        ],
                        "Eiko": ["Zidane!", "Wake up, Zidane!"],
                        "Mikoto": [
                                "You haven't got a chance.",
                                "This is the Red Rose.",
                                "My name is Mikoto. Everyone is alive. You are very close to them."
                        ],
                        "Necron": [
                                "You stand before the final dimension, and I am the darkness of eternity...",
                                "All life bears death from birth. Life fears death, but lives only to die. It starts with anxiety. Anxiety becomes fear. Fear leads to anger...anger leads to hate...hate leads to suffering... The only cure for this fear is total destruction. Kuja was a victim of his own fear. He concluded he could only save himself by destroying the origin of all things--the crystal.",
                                "... Now, the theory is undeniable. Kuja's actions prove it. All things live to perish. At last, life has uncovered this truth. Now, it is time to end this world.",
                                "I exist for one purpose... To return everything back to the zero world, where there is no life and no crystal to give life. In a world of nothing, fear does not exist. This is the world that all life desires.",
                                "Foolish creature... Your fears have already deluded you. One day, you will choose destruction over existence, as Kuja did. When he sought to destroy the crystal, the purpose of life ended. Now, come... Enter the zero world that you desire."
                        ],
                        "Steiner": ["Beatrix!"],
                        "Kuppo": [
                                "Ku... Kupo... KUPO! (The wall collapses and a moogle is (thrown out.)"
                        ],
                        "Black Mage Near Pond": [
                                "Why does Mr. 192 call his synthesis shop 'Black Cat'? His cat isn't black.",
                                "Oh, I get it now! 'Black Cat Synthesis Shop' is much easier to say and remember! Wow, Mr. 192 is really smart!"
                        ],
                        "Other Black Mage Near Pond": [
                                "Mr. 32 wanted to call it the 'Black Mage and Cat's Synthesis Shop,' but Mr. 192 thought the name was too long."
                        ],
                        "Kid": ["Okay. (Five little rat kids run over.)"],
                        "Black Mage naming a Genome": [
                                "I think his name should be No. 444!",
                                "Oh, you don't like even numbers? Then how about No. 555?"
                        ],
                        "Other Black Mage naming a Genome": ["No, it should be No. 888!"],
                        "Quan": ["Quina! You stop!"],
                        "Beatrix": ["Bingo!", "Moron!"]
                },
                "Chosen Moogle": {
                        "Mocha": ["Kupo!"],
                        "Momatose": ["Kupo!"]
                },
                "Woman": {
                        "Hilda": [
                                "Pardon me, but is someone there?",
                                "Who might you be? Where has that... Kuja gone?",
                                "What? You chased him away? I know not who you are, but you have my sincere gratitude.",
                                "Could this be... Princess Garnet? Why is it! It is you!",
                                "Oh, how long has it been! I haven't seen Your Highness for ages! Why, look how you've grown... So, whatever brought you to this dreadful place?"
                        ],
                        "Margaret Miller": ["Come hither, ya!"],
                        "Wei": ["I think it is."]
                },
                "Young Man": {
                        "Debating Young Man": [
                                "We're having a debate right now. In 'I Want to Be Your Canary,' why do you think Cornelia had to die?",
                                "No! It was to prove that she loved Marcus just as much as she loved her father. What do you think?",
                                "Heh, heh, heh! I told you!",
                                "We're having a debate right now.",
                                "No! It's all about aesthetics.",
                                "Heh, heh, heh! I told you!",
                                "We're having a debate right now about the importance of having nations.",
                                "No! Nobody can live on his own.",
                                "Heh, heh, heh! I told you!",
                                "We seem to agree on a lot of stuff.",
                                "We never agree on anything. I wonder why..."
                        ],
                        "Justin": [
                                "What did you just say!?",
                                "Lies! They may look human, but that's where the similarity ends!",
                                "They didn't even flinch, even when one of their own got killed."
                        ]
                },
                "Officer": {
                        "Lindblum Officer": [
                                "It may be tradition, but this is a dreadful festival. So many lives lost each year, especially because of him...",
                                "Very good. Now we wait for the signal.",
                                "Whoa!",
                                "I like to look at this statue while I wait for the airship to arrive.",
                                "It gets so busy once the ships arrive."
                        ],
                        "Officer (Green Jacket)": [
                                "What!? We haven't even received the minister's authorization!",
                                "Alright, release the mus before they let him loose. Hurry!",
                                "The Industrial District is gone, and the Business and Theater Districts are also in ruins.",
                                "Yes, sir.",
                                "The guards here fool around sometimes, so I have to watch over them closely."
                        ]
                },
                "Conductor": {
                        "Conductor (Tantalus)": [
                                "Okay, let's really liven up this place!",
                                "Alright!",
                                "Hey, Zidane, what are you doing here?",
                                "Zzzz... Zzzz...",
                                "(You can't speak with him for some reason.)"
                        ]
                },
                "Burmecian Kid": {
                        "Burmecian Kid Jack": [
                                "Daddy's gone!",
                                "Are we safe now?",
                                "Alright!",
                                "Waaa!!!",
                                "Where's dad?"
                        ],
                        "Burmecian Kid Adam": [
                                "Waaaah!",
                                "No more monsters?",
                                "Yeah!",
                                "No!",
                                "Waaa!"
                        ]
                },
                "Alexandrian Soldier": {
                        "Alexandrian Officer": [
                                "My, my... They have an oglop for a regent and buffoons for soldiers.",
                                "Any word from the lookout?",
                                "This must be Regent Cid's doing. He's hiding something...",
                                "Come with us, you two. Find the regent!"
                        ]
                },
                "Old Lady": {
                        "Alexandrian Old Lady": [
                                "I'm glad we're going to have a queen again. Alexandrian men are unreliable.",
                                "I can't sleep at night. The attack was so terrifying..."
                        ]
                },
                "Nobleman": {
                        "Nobleman (Pink Jacket)": [
                                "How do you like the scenery? Isn't it beautiful?",
                                "I-I'll protect you!",
                                "P-Please don't interrupt our date.",
                                "Y-Y-You must be a thief! B-B-But I'm not scared of you!"
                        ],
                        "Nobleman (Motley)": [
                                "What do you want? I have nothing to say to the likes of you.",
                                "What do you want? I have nothing to say to the likes of you."
                        ],
                        "Nobleman (Auction House)": [
                                "The main attraction of tonight's auction is Reflect Ring, supposedly.",
                                "You never know. If other people spend money buying other items, it could be cheaper. The man who always sits in the front row is there to buy the main attraction. You can try recommending other items to him, maybe...",
                                "The main attraction of tonight's auction is Dark Matter, supposedly.",
                                "I purchased a life-sized griffon statue the other day...",
                                "Indeed, it is. I had to add a room to my mansion for it!",
                                "Everything costs so much!",
                                "Ha ha ha..."
                        ],
                        "Young Nobleman (Outside Auction)": [
                                "I-It's not junk!",
                                "Come on, don't be mad...",
                                "Don't get mad... I'll tell you what: I'll sell off that thing I bought the other day.",
                                "But honey, we might use it someday!"
                        ]
                },
                "Noblewoman": {
                        "Noblewoman (Green Dress)": [
                                "It looks splendid... But isn't it dangerous around here?"
                        ],
                        "Noblewoman (Purple Dress)": [
                                "It's beautiful. I'll come back with someone else.",
                                "Oh, yes, I'm happy just to be with you."
                        ],
                        "Noblewoman (Yellow Dress)": [
                                "But if that's true, there's no chance in the world I could ever afford to buy it.",
                                "Oh, my...",
                                "Tee hee hee..."
                        ],
                        "Noblewoman (outside auctionhouse)": [
                                "Why did you have to pay 5,000 Gil to buy a piece of junk like that!?",
                                "I'm taking it out of your allowance!",
                                "Why did you buy it if you were going to sell it off so quickly!?",
                                "THAT'S IT! I've had it with you!"
                        ]
                },
                "Young Nobleman": {
                        "Young Nobleman (Pink)": [
                                "How do you like it here? Isn't it nice?",
                                "Oh, I'm so glad you joined me for tea again tonight."
                        ],
                        "Young Nobleman (Auction)": [
                                "How wonderful! I bet it's gorgeous.",
                                "I was also thinking about buying a behemoth statue for our mansion.",
                                "Ha ha ha..."
                        ]
                },
                "Burmecian Soldier": {
                        "Wounded Burmecian Soldier": [
                                "Please forgive my intrusion... I bring urgent news... from our king.",
                                "Our kingdom is being attacked by some unknown force! We are severely outmatched! Please send reinforcements immediately!",
                                "The enemy looks like an army of mages wearing... steeple-crowned hats.",
                                "Thank you, Regent! The kind... and all"
                        ],
                        "Dying Burmecian Soldier": [
                                "... Black mages... Couldn't do anything.",
                                "Ugh... I'm done for. Take this bell"
                        ],
                        "Burmecian Soldier fighting black mages": [
                                "ARGH!",
                                "Take this bell...",
                                "PLease... protect Burmecia...",
                                "Please... protect Burmecia..."
                        ],
                        "Dying Burmecian Soldier 2": [
                                "Freya... Please be careful... Master Gizamaluke has gone mad. He's being controlled by some strange clowns.",
                                "Don't worry... about me"
                        ],
                        "Dying Burmecian Soldier 3": [
                                "Ugh... Get the bell... by the bed",
                                "......"
                        ],
                        "Brave Burmecian Soldier": [
                                "Burmecia will never fall! Prepare to die!!!",
                                "B-Beatrix!?",
                                "... Thank you, Freya."
                        ]
                },
                "Black Mage": {
                        "Friendly Black Mage": [
                                "Ahh! H-H-Humans...",
                                "HUmans! Run!!!",
                                "The humans are here!"
                        ],
                        "Black Mage No. 111": ["It's born!!!", "Oh..."],
                        "Friendly Black Mage 2": ["? What's wrong?", "!"],
                        "Black Mage No. 32": ["Why are you here!?", "Yeah!"],
                        "Black Mage No. 192": [
                                "This is our village!",
                                "You forced the little guy to guide you here, didn't you!? That's all you humans ever think about, using us!"
                        ],
                        "Black Mage No. 234": ["I am Mr. 234.", "Yes."]
                },
                "Scholar": {
                        "Scholar (Alexandria Library)": [
                                "The princess? No, she hasn't visited today.",
                                "Oh, I do wonder how the princess's royal tutor, Doctor Tot, is doing.",
                                "You know, this globe of Gaia was presented by the late king in celebration of the birth of Princess Garnet.",
                                "Now, where is that script for 'I Want to Be Your Canary' that Princess Garnet asked for?",
                                "We haven't seen the princess today.",
                                "Her Majesty ordered some texts about eidolons, but we've got a lot of books here, you know.",
                                "It may have something to do with the secret in the queen's chamber.",
                                "I found an old reference material that talked about a purple flame, but I don't know if it has any significance.",
                                "The queen is trying to collect the jewels?",
                                "The jewels you speak of are actually not a whole jewel, but shards of a single jewel.",
                                "It seems that the jewel was divided into several pieces.",
                                "Alexandria, Lindblum, and Cleyra each recieved a piece of the jewel for safekeeping.",
                                "Has Her Highness evacuated the castle yet?",
                                "There are enemies in town? Well, I guess we had better escape.",
                                "I see. I'm leaving right now.",
                                "Really? We're under attack?"
                        ],
                        "Scholar (Bishop's Mansion)": [
                                "Bishop, the master of this mansion, likes to fund scholastic research. He also runs a synthesis shop and rents out a nearby tower to a researcher. Rich people do strange things.",
                                "Many things come into Treno. This means you can always find something new."
                        ],
                        "Scholar (Daguerro)": [
                                "Most people believe that moonlight is a reflection of sunlight, but some astronomers have refuted this theory with the fact that moonlight is visible even during a dual lunar eclipse.",
                                "How unfortunate that most scientists and engineers concentrate on airship development",
                                "The theory of a second world, an 'underworld,' has existed since ancient times",
                                "I can't find 'The Eidolon and I.' I've looked everywhere.",
                                "Oh, really? Thank you.",
                                "I enjoy my life here, being surrounded by all these books."
                        ]
                                "Zidane": [
                                "I hear someone talking.",
                                "Magic seems effective.",
                                "Nice!",
                                "10 Gil, huh?",
                                "This fire's so hot, it could probably melt steel instantly.",
                                "Pigeon turd alert!",
                                "The sandstorm is too fierce!",
                                "There are pickles scattered everywhere. It smells awful around here.",
                                "The flame looks so cold... It's as though it's weeping.",
                                "There's a hole.",
                                "There's something written on the wall. Eiko, 3 years old. Mog, 3 years old. Same age!",
                                "... There's nothing new.",
                                "... There's nothing here."
                        ],
                        "Tantarian": [
                                "Challenge me, if you dare.",
                                "Save your energy...",
                                "You are worthy..."
=
                "Old Woman": {
                        "Ilia's Grandmother": [
                                "Whew, I'm almost done...",
                                "I'm not done with Ilia's dress yet. Come back later.",
                                "Is that you, Ilia? Your new dress is almost done...",
                                "Ilia's dress isn't finished yet...",
                                "I was almost finished with Ilia's clothes..."
                        ],
                        "Old Woman (Treno Equipment Shop)": [
                                "What can I do for you?",
                                "(Buy/sell screen opens up.)",
                                "The master of the Knight family, who owns this building, keeps that monster as a pet.",
                                "(Dialogue cancelled.)",
                                "Wow, I can't believe it... Here's your prize. (He gets a Tonberry Card.)",
                                "Are you sure? I can't guarantee your safety.",
                                "Wow, I can't believe it... Here's your prize. (Win: Circlet)",
                                "(Buy/sell screen opens up)"
                        ],
                        "Old Woman (Esto Gaza)": [
                                "Oh, so you're here to see the Shimmering Island, too, eh?",
                                "The Shimmering Island is the Path of Souls, you know.",
                                "Young man, don't you think the bishop is a right fine man?",
                                "I feel a little younger whenever I visit.",
                                "The Shimmering Island is the Path of Souls, you know.",
                                "I feel a little younger whenever I visit."
                        ]
                },
                "Man": {
                        "Man (Dali Village)": [
                                "Why is it moving? Is it true that the mayor's brother found it?",
                                "... Wasn't he on the old lady's side before?",
                                "I guess the guys at the castle will take care of it.",
                                "Gotcha.",
                                "I wonder what they're gonna use them for? We've been making lots of 'em since they set up the factory six months ago."
                        ],
                        "Fratley": [
                                "Yes... Beatrix. I hear there are many fierce warriors out in the world--some even more powerful than even I... ... Beatrix of Alexandria, in particular. They say her swordsmanship is the best in the land."
                        ],
                        "Garland": [
                                "You have gone too far, Kuja. I granted you the freedom to do as you wish in Gaia for one purpose alone."
                        ],
                        "Kal": ["Hey, isn't that...?"],
                        "Lindblum Man": [
                                "Listen, Lindblum is Alexandrian territory now.",
                                "Are you ready?",
                                "Follow me. The regent is waiting on the Base Level.",
                                "Let me know when you're ready."
                        ],
                        "Alexandrian Man": [
                                "Isn't the new queen a little young? Personally, I think General Beatrix would make a better queen.",
                                "Well, that's it for today. Time to get ready to see the play.",
                                "I don't have a lot to do, but too much work is also problematic...",
                                "Rebuild the bar!"
                        ],
                        "Man in Esto Gaza": [
                                "I come from Lindblum.",
                                "Once in a while, there's a ship that flies around the Shimmering Island. I wonder where it comes from.",
                                "The bishop sometimes hears voices from the Path of Souls.",
                                "I wonder what sort of place the Shimmering Island is. Someday I want to visit there!",
                                "I wonder what sort of place the Shimmering Island is. Someday I want to visit there!"
                        ]
                },
                "Girl": {
                        "Ilia": [
                                "Are you awright? Here! You dwopped your ticket. Bye-bye!"
                        ],
                        "Girl near Treno Tower": [
                                "This tower is always closed. Something fishy's going on!",
                                "I saw him! I saw an old man wearing glasses walking out of this tower! This is big...",
                                "That girl with the ribbon in her hair and the boy with the pointy hat looked suspicious...",
                                "Alexandria and Lindblum fell. Anything can happen in this world. I can only rely on myself!"
                        ],
                        "Girl in Alexandria": [
                                "I'm gonna be a strong and beautiful woman like Princess Garnet when I grow up!",
                                "Do you think Princess Garnet is in love?",
                                "I don't wanna die!",
                                "(Same as in AL15.)",
                                "I found a card from the rubble. You can have it! (Receive Alexandria Card)",
                                "A school!"
                        ],
                        "Aspiring Queen in Pink": [
                                "I'm the queen! My orders are absolute! Hey, what does absolute mean?",
                                "wins!"
                        ],
                        "Lisa": [
                                "This star lives like we do. The Shimmering Island is proof of the Path of Souls.",
                                "He's the seventh in a long line of bishops.",
                                "Hi. Did you come to see the Shimmering Island, too?",
                                "Once in a while I see a strange ship fly overhead.",
                                "This is the only place you can see the Shimmering Island from.",
                                "They say the bishop is really a great man."
                        ],
                        "Eiko": ["Mog, hurry!"],
                        "Mikoto": [
                                "She will soon awaken.",
                                "Where is your man?",
                                "Tell him I am waiting in the underground laboratory.",
                                "Yes. I am glad you understand.",
                                "They are my peers. We are Genomes. We live in this village.",
                                "Not just them, but you and me, too. It is the name of the seed given to all of us. Its name is Genome.",
                                "Why are you not happy? You have returned to the place of your birth.",
                                "What can we do? After all, we are made that way. And we are built to watch over each other and work together as soulless Genomes.",
                                "Because you are... special.",
                                "We are mere vessels. You have been given a greater purpose. The will of Garland is absolute...",
                                "Garland watches over this planet. His mission is to restore the people of Terra.",
                                "They are merely vessels. So am I, and so are you. But the true people of Terra have been asleep for ages",
                                "What else can there be? Terra has always absorbed new planets to survive.",
                                "Once, Garland tried to use a more forceful method, but failed.",
                                "Because of his failure, he was forced to wait a long time",
                                "Planets have a cycle of souls. Souls are born from the planet, and then return to it.",
                                "Garland is waiting for you. Come...",
                                "He went on his own to see Garland.",
                                "He went... Yes, he went to find out the reason for his existence.",
                                "'I am an enemy of the people of Gaia,' he said as he walked through the gate to Pandemonium.",
                                "Heaven grant the wandering souls eternal repose...",
                                "What's the point? They're only empty vessels...",
                                "... Unlike the rest of them, Garland gave me a soul, that I might replace you and Kuja.",
                                "Did you find an answer?",
                                "...",
                                "Huh?",
                                "My name is... Mikoto.",
                                "This way...",
                                "I told you. You are going to see Garland.",
                                "There is a way. See? You may find him through the portal.",
                                "You learn quickly."
                        ]
                },
                "Boy": {
                        "Alexandrian Boy": [
                                "I wanted to become a soldier when I grew up, but if this is what I have to put up with...",
                                "This little queen is a bit demanding...",
                                "I wonder if the boy and girl standing over there are lovers?",
                                "This way! Hurry!",
                                "Card games are hard. Are you good at playing them?",
                                "A playground!",
                                "(Same as in Al15.)"
                        ],
                        "Esto Gaza Boy": [
                                "The bishop'll get angry if ya talk too loud.",
                                "Gatz says we're here to see the Path of Souls, but I don't see it anywhere.",
                                "They say this place is holy!",
                                "Did you hear what happened in Alexandria!?",
                                "The pigeon flew away.",
                                "I saw it! I saw the big ship fly!"
                        ],
                        "Son": [
                                "It's the champion!",
                                "Ewww, Dad, it's an oglop!",
                                "It's the champion's pet?"
                        ]
                },
                "Worker": {
                        "Dali Village Worker": ["Nope. Not me.", "I hear ya!"],
                        "Lindblum Mechanical Worker": [
                                "What? A girl? Oh yeah. I saw her go upstairs just a while ago.",
                                "Hold on one sec. My job's pretty simple, but the lift wouldn't operate without me.",
                                "Hold on one sec. Darn it. I can't find the screw.",
                                "I'm sorry. It's currently out of service.",
                                "People still use that stuff? I know they used to use 'em in the old days.",
                                "The city's made a real comeback, don't you think?",
                                "(... He kept telling me to go right before.)",
                                "... He kept telling me to go right before."
                        ],
                        "South Gate Worker": [
                                "This gate breaks down a lot, 'cause the hinges don't fit very well. This road leads to the bottom of the Mist. No one uses it. There's no need to fix it, really. So, I just polish up the gate and make it look all nice. That takes care of it for a couple months. Hee hee.",
                                "Rub-rub! Rubba-dub!",
                                "Scrubba-dub! Scrubba-dub-dub!",
                                "Ahh... The sun feels great. Hee hee."
                        ],
                        "ACTION": ["(Garnet kicks Steiner through the bag.)"],
                        "Steiner": [
                                "(I must tolerate him for the sake of the princess!)",
                                "I must tolerate him for the sake of the princess!"
                        ],
                        "Worker at Rest Stop (sitting)": [
                                "I can't believe I'm stuck here, working in the middle of nowhere."
                        ],
                        "Worker at Rest Stop (standing)": [
                                "South Gate serves as a gate to airships, as well as cable car travelers. But the gate's broken right now; the airships can't pass through."
                        ]
                },
                "Aviator": {
                        "Aviator (Lindblum Docks)": [
                                "Wow, check this baby out! She's a classic! They used this ship's engine as the basis for all other airships. Nothing compares to this baby. You can't call yourself a true airman until you've ridden a wooden barge like this one.",
                                "I'm on an airship most of the time, so I often feel uneasy on land.",
                                "I wish that airship would get here already.",
                                "Board the Invincible? {Board, then go to the bridge/ Board, then go to the world map/Don't board}",
                                "You rode that ship, right? I wanna ride it, too.",
                                "I wanted to ride on No. 2 so bad...",
                                "An airman is useless without an airship.",
                                "I heard the restoration of the town is going pretty well.",
                                "Why is the regent taking so long to build another airship?",
                                "Board the Invincible?"
                        ],
                        "Erin": [
                                "I heard No. 2 has engine problems. Looks like we won't be going anywhere for a while.",
                                "We now have the technology to fly without Mist, but we don't have an airship. It's so sad."
                        ]
                },
                "Engineer": {
                        "Engineer Gabin": [
                                "Should I crush its head? How about its chest?",
                                "I don't care if it lives. My friend was burned alive by it!"
                        ],
                        "Bull Engineer": [
                                "Judging by our experience with Hilda 2, we are almost finished with the engine."
                        ],
                        "New Engineer": ["How come?"]
                },
                "Adventurer": {
                        "Adventurer (Male Red Mage)": [
                                "Treno shops sell items from all over. It's an excellent place to prepare for a journey. I hate to get my usual...",
                                "This city thrives on chaos. The black market is fueled by uncertainty. I have to get my usual...",
                                "There's an old legend in this region about a dragon god and his divine protection.",
                                "Many people have come and settled here because of the water."
                        ],
                        "Adventurer (Female Red Mage)": [
                                "Daguerreo was built by some strange scientist. To get around this place, you'll have to use the lifts, which are powered by water pressure.",
                                "Oh, I see... That should increase the water pressure to raise the remaining lifts."
                        ]
                },
                "Clerk": {
                        "Clerk (Bishop's Mansion)": ["Welcome! (Synth shop opens up.)"],
                        "Wendy Grocer": ["Rally-ho!"]
                },
                "Old Man": {
                        "Ilia's Grandfather": [
                                "Darlin', I'm home!",
                                "Rahaha. Every year, it's always the same. You're spoilin' them grandkids, I say!",
                                "Maybe Grandma would've finished Ilia's new dress if I didn't demand food all the time...",
                                "Grandma said she would make a dress for Ilia, but it's taking her forever to finish it."
                        ],
                        "Hard of Hearing Old Man": [
                                "Huh? My wife? She died 3 years ago.",
                                "Oh, really? I'm doing fine, thanks for asking. I may be old, but I'm still healthy.",
                                "You're still young! Don't give up! Good luck!",
                                "I used to gamble up a storm at the Card Stadium when I was young.",
                                "I used to buy out the entire auction in my younger days...",
                                "Suicide, eh? I've seen many people commit suicide because of gambling debts... What a shame... Rest in peace..."
                        ],
                        "Ramuh": ["That is up to you... My name is Ramuh."],
                        "Garland": [
                                "So you finally came. The time has come at last... The one who folds time is here.",
                                "Ask my name, will you? Then let us ask... What is your name?",
                                "What is your name?",
                                "So you believe a given name has meaning... Boy, you have been bewitched by the light of the blue moon.",
                                "Twelve years ago, I lost one of my most prized Genomes. I created him and sent him to Gaia to disrupt the cycle of souls there. You are that Genome... I am glad you have returned."
                        ],
                        "Mourning Old Man": [
                                "Finish it off!",
                                "If it's human, make it understand the suffering it caused!",
                                "I wonder what the regent is going to do. Is he going to let them roam free forever?"
                        ],
                        "Old Man in Esto Gaza": [
                                "It's so cold.",
                                "Ever since I started coming here, my back's been as good as new. See? Ooof! I'm still as strong as them young'uns!",
                                "If the glow of the Shimmering Island stops, it means the Path of Souls is closed.",
                                "The glow of the Shimmering Island is proof that it is home to the Path of Souls.",
                                "If the glow of the Shimmering Island stops, it means the Path of Souls is closed."
                        ],
                        "Old Man in Daguerro": [
                                "A good book lasts forever. It will always be there, in your memories.",
                                "You appear to be quite the traveler. I can tell... If you happen to find an item called the Magical Fingertip",
                                "Huh? You... You have the Magical Fingertip!!!",
                                "Oh, thank you!!! ......",
                                "... I used to be a fairly well-known blacksmith.",
                                "Okay. I understand...",
                                "I don't have many years left, but I'll make the best of them."
                        ]
                },
                "Crew Member": {
                        "Crew Member (Sailor)": [
                                "Excuse me! Please let me know if you'd like to switch out your party members! I shall assist you in any way that I can during your journey.",
                                "Master Zidane! I'm showing abnormal readings!",
                                "Would you like to change your party members? {Y/N}",
                                "Would you like to change your party members?"
                        ],
                        "Crew Member (Engine)": [
                                "The engine is working fine!",
                                "We're going to overheat!"
                        ],
                        "Crew Member (Black-haired Sailor)": [
                                "One of the locations you mentioned is just south of us!",
                                "I've been a sailor for a long time! I'm confident in my sense of direction.",
                                "Please don't hesistate to ask me if you forget your destination!",
                                "J-Juding from our current course, our next d-destination is...",
                                "S-Sorry. I'm not very good at explaining things...",
                                "Our next destination is located south of Ipsen's Castle.",
                                "(You can change your party. Afterwards, the Crewman will say: Godspeed!)",
                                "Godspeed!",
                                "(You can change your party.",
                                "Yes, sir! I appreciate it!"
                        ],
                        "Zidane": [
                                "Alright, listen carefully... On top of this castle is a mural"
                        ]
                },
                "Guard": {
                        "Guard (Dali Gate)": [
                                "Huh? What do you want?",
                                "You gotta have a Gate Pass to pass through here. There's no work here right now. Try again when they need construction workers.",
                                "The shopgirl at Vega won't be here for a while.",
                                "Then wait right there.",
                                "(Dialogue cancelled.)",
                                "South Gate is the border of Alexandria and Lindblum. We check every airship and person crossing the border. We're doing the best we can to keep the two nations safe. Have you ever been on an airship?",
                                "(Dialogue cancelled.)",
                                "The Village of Dali is beyond this gate. You gotta go to the other gate if you wanna get to Treno.",
                                "What, you wanna pass through here?",
                                "You got a Gate Pass? ... I guess you do. I'll open it now.",
                                "Will you get outta here? I wanna close the gate.",
                                "Huh? What do you want?",
                                "You gotta have a Gate Pass to pass through here. You got a Gate Pass? ... I guess you do. I'll open it now.",
                                "The airship gate is still broken. But the construction workers are gathering, so it should be fixed soon."
                        ],
                        "Guard (Treno Gate)": [
                                "Hey, we gotta lower the gate first. Show me your Gate Pass. Yup, this is it! Hey, will you lower the gate? Be careful out there.",
                                "Treno is only a short walk from this gate.",
                                "The Mist disappeared, and the cable cars stopped working."
                        ],
                        "Treno Guard": [
                                "Where did he go...?",
                                "This is the King family auction site!",
                                "But he's a guard for this mansion...",
                                "W-We've got you now!",
                                "Don't run away!",
                                "There are so many criminals here nowadays."
                        ],
                        "Soldier": ["Zzzz... Zzzz..."]
                },
                "Person": {
                        "Quina": ["Hungry...", "Frogs..."],
                        "Genome (Purple)": [
                                "We possess no age. We were built this way.",
                                "In time, we will receive souls. Then our bodies will begin to grow.",
                                "..."
                        ],
                        "Genome (Pink)": [
                                "Why do you rest?",
                                "By night, do you mean the condition in which light recedes?",
                                "There is the entrance.",
                                "We vessels must exercise sufficiently in order to maintain health."
                        ],
                        "Genome (Orange)": [
                                "We develop into vessels...",
                                "Asexual beings would lack the genetic diversity to adapt to new environments...",
                                "Heightened recognition of visual stimuli is a necessary condition for bodies to be used as vessels."
                        ],
                        "Genome (Purple - Storage)": [
                                "Gaia's blue light causes pain to those of us who were created by the civilization of Terra."
                        ],
                        "Genome (Orange - Storage)": [
                                "The waxing and waning of the moon, the respiration of the planets... Motion in stillness, stillness in motion..."
                        ],
                        "Genome (Purple near gate)": [
                                "Only the chosen may unlock the barrier."
                        ],
                        "Genome (Pink - Hall)": [
                                "A planet's shimmer is its breath, a sign of life-activity caused by the cycling of souls."
                        ],
                        "Genome (Purple - Hall)": ["As the planets turn..."],
                        "Genome (Orange - Hall)": [
                                "Fleeting knowledge is useless to vessels... But information is given to prevent mental atrophy."
                        ],
                        "Genome (Pink 2 - Hall)": [
                                "A planet's color indicates its shape... Gaia is blue, Terra red."
                        ],
                        "Genome (Orange 2 - Hall)": [
                                "The flow of souls means that a planet has life... The stoppage of souls means that a planet is dead."
                        ],
                        "Genome (Orange - Lab)": [
                                "We measure their suitability as vessels for our research in order to create and grow a higher breed of Genome."
                        ],
                        "Genome (Pink - Lab)": ["Response value: 356."],
                        "Genome (Orange 2 - Lab)": [
                                "Activity measurement: 525. Surpasses basic value."
                        ],
                        "Genome (Pink 3 - Hall)": ["When the souls of Terra and Gaia mix"],
                        "Genome (Orange near gate)": [
                                "Our activity is restricted to the area before this gate."
                        ]
                },
                "Genome": {
                        "Genome (Purple)": [
                                "...",
                                "The light is unpleasant to us...",
                                "Does the water here ever stay still?",
                                "The water of Bran Bal was always still...",
                                "So, water and time both flow in Gaia...?",
                                "I see, so you enclose a captured life-form and conduct research here.",
                                "Water flowing... Time flowing... Things don't stay the same... I don't understand...",
                                "... These people are trying to call me a funny name...",
                                "That's enough! I don't need a name!",
                                "......"
                        ],
                        "Genome (Pink)": [
                                "Is this a monster?",
                                "!?",
                                "It won't bite?",
                                "What a strange tribe... It seems like they live in hiding.",
                                "It's obviously an imperfect life-form, but I feel a strange affinity to it...",
                                "Why do the people of Gaia pay special attention to communication through sound?"
                        ],
                        "Genome (Orange)": [
                                "Why do you display these items?",
                                "What are customers?",
                                "What is money?",
                                "This life-form flies? Why does it fly? Gaia is full of unnecessary things...",
                                "I'm supposed to be 'assisting' in the operation of this shop. What do I do?",
                                "I guess the people of Gaia decide when to rest based on the presence of light."
                        ]
                },
                "Red Mage": {
                        "Female Red Mage": [
                                "What!? What do you mean, there's no room!?",
                                "Oh, and that makes everything better!? We made a reservation!",
                                "Well, let's see... We were going to stay three nights.",
                                "Later tonight, huh...?",
                                "Okay! Agreed!",
                                "I can't wait to see that boy grow up and become the master of this inn!"
                        ],
                        "Male Red Mage": [
                                "I thought she might get mad again...",
                                "Whaddya mean, there's no vacancies!!!?",
                                "What!? I don't believe this!!! I have a reservation, dammit!!! Geeez!!"
                        ]
                },
                "Shopkeeper": {
                        "Shopkeeper (Alexandria)": [
                                "I keep telling my son we'll go out of business, but he never comes home.",
                                "There are strange men hanging around my shop. (Buy/ /sell screen opens.)",
                                "(Same as in AL24.)",
                                "I stocked up the shop the best I could.",
                                "No, the roads!"
                        ],
                        "Shopkeeper (Rest Stop)": [
                                "Get your supplies here before you cross the border. (Buy/sell screen opens up.)"
                        ],
                        "Shopkeeper (Treno Slums)": [
                                "We've got a wide selection! Take your time and see! (Buy/sell screen opens up.)",
                                "We've got a wide selection! Take your time and see! (Buy/sell screen opens up.)"
                        ],
                        "Clerk (Bishop's Mansion)": [
                                "Welcome! (Synth buy/sell opens.)",
                                "Oh, it's you, Doctor Tot.",
                                "You should've called me. I'll get yelled at if the inventory's wrong!"
                        ],
                        "Shopkeeper (Esto Gaza)": [
                                "How can I help you? (Buy/sell screen opens up.)",
                                "Thanks, come again! (Said when you leave.)",
                                "Thanks, come again! (Said upon leaving the shop.)"
                        ]
                },
                "Mogster": {


                                "From Mogrika to Moolan"
                        ],
                        "Ruby": [
                                "Zidane! Are you alright? I'm doin' good!",
                                "p.s. Tell the boys in Tantalus I said Hi!",
                                "Ain't y'all comin' back to Alexandria! I'm so lonely!",
                                "I decided to start a small theater, but I ain't had any luck finding actors"
                        ],
                        "Kupo": [
                                "I think Queen Brahne is up to something... but I suspect Princess Garnet even more!",
                                "Kupo! What's goign on in Alexandria!?",
                                "There's an amazing new champion sprinter in the town of Alexandria!"
                        ],
                        "Mois": [
                                
                                "Yo! Man, I got totally iced up by some dude with wings on his back!"
                        ],
                        "Fortune": [
                                "Good Omen A nice day to relax and put your mind at ease.",
                                "Good Omen A good day filled with many of life's simple pleasures.",
                                "Good Omen Today will be a day filled with deja vu.",
                                "Very Good Omen An auspicious day for you to go out and have fun!",
                                "Bad Omen There are good days, and there are bad days."
                        ],
                        "Gumo": [
                                "He always sounds so gruff. But I'm glad to hear Stiltzkin is traveling."
                        ],
                        "Kumop": [
                                "Stiltzkin visited me! Kupo! He said he found a place that seemed interesting, and then he left."
                        ],
                        "Mogki": [
                                "Stilzkin! Stiltzkin! Stiltzkin! Kupokupo! I wonder if he stopped in Lindblum!",
                                "Alexandria is in a horrible state right now"
                        ],
                        "Stiltzkin": [
                                "I left Lindblum and headed north.",
                                "There's trouble in this rainy city. The guys I saw there were heading towards Vube Desert",
                                "This...",
                                "might be...",
                                "the end of me...",
                                "I'm becoming familiar with the geography of the Outer Continent.",
                                "Alexandria is a great place to be. It's comfortable and fun."
                        ],
                        "Grimo": ["I feel so sad when I see Mary, the part-time worker."],
                        "Nazna": [
                                "Grimo, in South Gate's Bohden Station, sent me a letter saying"
                        ],
                        "Atla": [
                                "Kupo! Strange people came into town and destroyed the entire place!"
                        ],
                        "Monev": [
                                "People are climbing up to Cleyra since the sandstorm disappeared"
                        ],
                        "Mopli": ["By the time this letter reaches Serino"],
                        "Mosh": ["Monty! Were you able to escape Evil Forest?"],
                        "Serino": ["I rode an airship called the Red Rose"],
                        "Moodon": ["Oh, it's terrible! Kupo! Mogki, from the castle"],
                        "Mogmatt": [
                                "It's been six months since I started living in Conde Petie"
                        ],
                        "Kuppo": ["Fossil Roo is very comfortable! I like it here."],
                        "Mimoza": [
                                "I haven't received any mail lately, kupo. What's going on? "
                        ],
                        "Cid": ["I'm still heavier than the other side."],
                        "Mojito": [
                                "According to rumors, Stiltzkin is on a quest to find out why Mognet stopped functioning!"
                        ],
                        "Artemicion": ["Mogrika! I'm in trouble... I used too much."],
                        "Mogrika": ["Artemecion rubbed it all over himself!"],
                        "Dutiful Daughter Slai": [
                                "You didn't know about the earthquake...? Huge roots, buried under ground, tore up cracks that Mist could escape through."
                        ]
                },
                "Dwarf": {
                        "Harold Pathknower": ["Rally-ho! Ye can pass!"]